Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System:
The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014


    “The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine has adopted the resolution on conclusion of the
    Association Agreement between Ukraine, on the one hand, and the European Union,
    on the other hand, at its meeting on November 21, 2013, in accordance with which for
    the benefit of Ukraine’s national security the process of preparing for signing of the
    Association Agreement between Ukraine and EU is suspended.” (GovUkr 21.11.2013a)


Immediately after this statement had become known, about 1.000 citizens came to
Maidan Nezalezhnosti (“Independence Square”) in the centre of Kiev to protest against
president Viktor Yanukovych and his government’s plans not to sign the EU Association
Agreement. According to the Maidan Monitoring Information Center (MMIC), a Ukrainian
non-governmental organisation, social media played a crucial role in helping the
protests to gather momentum right from the outset.1 Only three days later, on Novem-
ber 24, the largest demonstration since the Orange Revolution in 2004 took place, as the
Kyiv Post, a Ukrainian newspaper based in Kiev, headlines in its weekly print edition.2
According to the newspaper, estimates from people on the scene ranged from 50.000 to
100.000 participants protesting against Ukraine’s abrupt U-turn in foreign policy while
dubbing their peaceful rally as “EuroMaidan”. Moreover, despite all the serious fears
and claims the people on Maidan were determined to express, the atmosphere on Kiev’s
central square in those days reminded a bit of a public festival: bands performing on
different stages, people singing and dancing while providing themselves with food and


1    The official “EuroMaidan” Facebook page, established by journalists and civil society activists, has
     garnered more than 102.000 subscribers since its beginning late on November 21. During the first
     days of the demonstrations the page appeared in the top 20 of Ukrainian Facebook pages (see
     KyivPost 1.12.2013). However, in the aftermath of the protests, a large-scale research project deal-
     ing with the role of social media relativised the widely unchallenged strong role of social media,
     saying that facebook in itself (or social media in general) did not make people protest (see Onuch
     2015).
2    As it will be outlined, the “Orange Revolution” of 2004 represents a key reference for observers of
     the Maidan protests in 2013/2014 (see below 5.3; for a detailed historical perspective on the Orange
     Revolution in Ukraine apart from the present study see Kappeler 2014).
118   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      warmth in the tents of the EuroMaidan camp that covered the whole square (see Kyiv
      Post 29.11.2013: 18–20).
          Less than three months later, eyewitness reports draw a fundamentally different pic-
      ture of Kiev’s Maidan:

          “It’s an on-going crumping of flash grenades. Ukrainian policemen shoot at Ukrainian
          citizens. Only 15 meters away from me, a protester lost his hand from a grenade. He’s
          stretchered off. Pungent smoke, soot, Molotov cocktails everywhere.”3

      On February 21, the KyivPost refers to central Kiev as a “war zone” where protesters catch
      fire as they run from burning barricades and, during the pauses, the bodies of persons
      slain during the clashes are inspected (Kyiv Post 21.02.2014). On the same day, after
      president Yanukovych and opposition leaders had signed an agreement that includes
      the return to the 2004 constitution and new presidential elections, Andrej Kurkow, a
      Ukrainian novelist, commented, “So far, there is no victory. And probably there won’t be
      one. Ukraine has already lost. More than 100 citizens of our country are dead.” (Kurkow
      2014: 128). In sum, there are between 500 to 600 casualties and more than 100 deaths
      (protesters, policemen) that were officially declared victims of Maidan and later referred
      to as the “Heavenly Hundred Heroes” (Kyiv Post 26.06.2014; see also Marples 2014: 25).
           From a present-day perspective, the Maidan protests in Kiev seem to mark the start-
      ing point of a long-lasting crisis in Ukraine that brought about a contested modification
      of the status of Crimea, separatism and war in the south-eastern regions of Donetsk and
      Lugansk, and newly emerging contradictions between the policies of Russia, Ukraine,
      the EU and the USA that led to long-term tensions (e.g. a new regime of mutual political
      and economic sanctions; see UCDP 2020b). Even though the overall development of the
      Ukrainian crisis in the long run may be highly interesting, the present case study con-
      centrates on how the situation on Maidan, both in a material and metaphorical sense,
      was observed in a relatively short time frame from late November 2013 to February 2014.
      Throughout the history of Ukraine, particularly since the country’s independence in 1991,
      the central square in Kiev has been perceived as a symbolically charged site.4 During
      the 2013/2014 protests, once again, Maidan was seen way beyond a simple geographical
      venue of pro-European or anti-government demonstrations in the capital of Ukraine, it
      became the epitome of the country’s future or, as a comment on MMIC’s website says, of
      “Ukraine’s soul” (MMIC 24.12.2013a).



      3    This statement first and foremost represents a personal perspective of an individual observer on
           the situation on the Maidan, February 18, 2014 (see Dathe and Rostek 2014: 9; statement by Andrij
           Vovk). Yet, it stands for a huge number of eyewitness reports that were published in the aftermath
           of the protests (see also Andrukhovych 2014; Kurkow 2014; Schuller 2014) and are exemplarily cited
           here to illustrate how completely different the scenery is perceived compared to the beginning of
           the protests. Nevertheless, within the framework of this case study, such observations would be
           analytically relevant only if they were broadly articulated in the (real-time) context of conflict com-
           munication (which is obviously not the case here since the reports were published in late 2014).
      4    See documentation “Ukrainian Maidans are 25 years old” (MMIC 2015; see also MMIC 4.01.2014a,
           Kappeler 2014.
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           119

    Obviously, within a short period of time, the political, economic, and social landscape
in Ukraine changed in a dramatic way. Protests that had widely been observed as peaceful
expressions of political will turned into civil war-like conditions within less than three
months. How exactly did the protests on Maidan escalate? More particularly, how could
violence become a part of the dispute? Based on the analysis of the text data, the following
sections present the condensed results of the empirical case study on the Maidan protests
and thus answer the questions raised.



5.1 Communication about the Maidan Protests:
    Cutting Swathes into Unclear Terrain

                                                           “Maidan! Ukraine, Europe.”5

As outlined earlier, conflicts are understood as social systems in their own right. In this
sense, ‘Maidan’ here is conceptualised as a conflict system or, in other words, as a dis-
cursive arena where contradicting communication got interlinked and stabilised over
time. In order to approximately reconstruct the process of conflict escalation in the given
time frame, this case study aims at setting marks into this unique discursive field of re-
lational references called Maidan. Of course, there is a myriad of stories about how the
Maidan protests are perceived by its observers at any given moment. Thus, the constitu-
tion and composition of Maidan as a conflict system or, more precisely, the attribution
of issues, parties and actions to the frame ‘Maidan protests’ or ‘EuroMaidan’ was con-
tinuously changing in the course of conflict escalation. To capture this dynamic, it was
necessary to clearly stake the claim of the case study’s empirical basis.
     In this case study, the analysed corpus of texts involves 575 documents that were se-
lected according to the methodological approach.6 First, there are official government
documents. These mainly include speeches, statements, announcements, and press re-
leases of the president, the prime minister and other government members that were
released via the “Government portal”, i.e. the official web-portal of the Ukrainian gov-
ernment.7 Second, to grasp the widespread political contradiction from civil society that
had been articulated through a wide range of public channels after the government’s
suspension of the EU Association Agreement, this analysis drew on a pragmatic aux-
iliary means.8 All documents analysed were gathered from “volunteer community re-


5    This is the title of a book that depicts personal experiences and eyewitness reports from the
     protests on Maidan 2013/2014 (see Dathe and Rostek 2014).
6    For an explanation of the empirical working levels of this study see chapter 4.3; for details concern-
     ing sources of the text corpus see Appendix A.1 and figure below.
7    Official government statements are published in Ukrainian and Russian, which are the official lan-
     guages in Ukraine. However, already well before the period of investigation, Ukrainian authorities
     changed over to the praxis of simultaneously releasing all official statements in Ukrainian, Russian
     and English as standard (see Appendix A.1.1).
8    Indeed, at that time, civil society experienced a kind of awakening considering the growing num-
     ber of online fora, platforms, and organisations (see e.g. “Maidan Press Center”, “EuromaidanSOS”,
     “EuromaidanPress”, “Institute of Mass Information”), not to mention the massive increase of discur-
120   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      sources” that are attributed to “civil society opposition”, i.e. websites that collect news,
      articles, and posts from other websites and social media as well as commentaries from
      its own staff to make them available for a larger public, virtually in real-time, during the
      protests.9 Third, according to the procedure on working level II, Ukraine-based mass
      media, i.e. print media coverage of the Maidan protests was also an essential part of
      the analysis. For this purpose, all weekly issues of the KyivPost and all biweekly issues
      of The Ukrainian Week that had been published during the investigation period were anal-
      ysed.10 Finally, the text corpus includes statements and reports from different interna-
      tional non-governmental organisations that reported on the Maidan protests on a more
      or less regular basis, particularly form Amnesty International (AI), the Centre of Policy and Le-
      gal Reforms (CPLR), the International Crisis Group (ICG) and the Ukrainian Helsinki Human
      Rights Union (UHHRU).
           As a matter of course, all documents collected from one of these four groups of
      sources express distinct observations that are specific products of the respective mode
      of observation behind. Although these sources represent separate perspectives, they
      have a stake in the (re-) production of the discursive field of the Maidan protests and
      thus in the joint construction of the conflict system’s plot.11




           sive input from social media via Facebook and other social media (see Onuch 2015). Yet, it would
           be next to impossible to analytically cover the totality of all these sources within the framework of
           the present case study.
      9    This case study particularly operated with texts (re-)issued by the Maidan Monitoring Information
           Center (MMIC) (see figure below for the website titled “Maidan – A Free Person in a Free Country”).
           The MMIC was chosen because it is one of the very few volunteer community resources that cov-
           ers the whole investigation period and offers all documents in English. Additionally, documents
           from “Ukraine-Nachrichten” (UkrN), an internet platform providing German translations of much-
           quoted news and agency reports as well as Facebook posts and blog commentaries were included.
           Since information is provided only if it is evaluated as particularly significant for the cause, vol-
           unteer community resources represent a kind of self-regulating mechanisms of selection on their
           own.
      10   The KyivPost is Ukraine’s leading English-language newspaper. It was founded in 1995 and went
           online in 2002. Its circulation amounts to 25.000 copies. In 2010, the KyivPost began to publish
           in Ukrainian and Russian. The Ukrainian Week is a weekly (in Ukrainian language) resp. biweekly
           (in an English edition) magazine. It was founded in 2007. Its circulation amounts to 41.500 copies.
           Both newspapers are managed by Ukrainian journalists and are widely referred to as independent
           media. In 2014, the staff of KyivPost won the prestigious Missouri Honor Medal for Distinguished Ser-
           vice in Journalism, at https://journalism.missouri.edu/the-j-school/the-missouri-honor-medal, ac-
           cessed December 8, 2020). The KyivPost and The Ukrainian Week were chosen for pragmatic rea-
           sons; even though both are published in English and thus, as such, do not fully participate in the
           broad Ukrainian-language discourse in society, they are assumed to adequately mirror major parts
           of public discourse and thus of conflict development.
      11   As part of the implementation of this case study, a network of resource persons was established.
           This network includes Ukrainian researchers from Viadrina European University in Frankfurt (Oder),
           from the Research Centre for East European Studies at the University of Bremen, from the Institut für
           Auslandsbeziehungen in Stuttgart as well as contact persons from the Consulate General of Ukraine in
           Munich. The successive composition of the text corpus is a result of personal consultations within
           the circle of these resource persons.
            Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014         121

Table 8: Overview of the Text Data Corpus (Ukraine)

                                                               Number of Docu-
     Source Type                Document Type                                          Sample Period
                                                               ments
     Ukrainian Govern-          official statements:           305 documents (each
     ment12                     announcements, press           between 100 and
                                releases, speeches             2.000 words)
     “Civil Society             statements, press re-          200 documents (each
     Opposition”13              leases, articles, com-         between 100 and
                                mentaries, posts (social       1.000 words)
                                media)                                                 November 21,
     Print Media                weekly/biweekly issues         20 documents (each      2013 – February 22,
     (KyivPost; The                                            between 15 and 20       2014
     Ukrainian Week)14                                         pages)
     (International)            articles, alerts, briefings,   50 documents (each
     Non-Governmental           reports, chronicles,           about 500 words)
     Organisations              commentaries
     (AI, CPLR, ICG,
     UHHRU)15

(Own table)



    To provide assistance to navigate in the course of conflict and its presentation here,
one of the main results of the sequential analysis of the data is highlighted at the very
beginning: According to the week-by-week analysis, there are a few observation spots
that are strikingly often referred to as turning points across the whole text corpus.16 Se-



12       Ukrainian government documents were gathered in October and November 2015. The respective
         government website had been available at http://www.kmu.gov.ua/control/en until 2018.
13       Documents from different contexts of Ukrainian civil society opposition were gathered in October
         and November 2015. The websites are still available at https://maidan.org.ua/en and at https://uk
         raine-nachrichten.de, even though the respective archives cannot be fully accessed.
14       Ukrainian print media coverage was gathered in October and November 2015. The websites and
         respective archives are still available at https://archive.kyivpost.com/PDF-archive/issue and at htt
         ps://ukrainianweek.com/category/archive, accessed November 19, 2022.
15       Reports of international NGOs were gathered in October and November 2015. The websites are
         partly still available at https://www.amnesty.org/en/location/europe-and-central-asia/ukraine, at
         https://pravo.org.ua/en, at https://www.crisisgroup.org, and at https://www.helsinki.org.ua/en,
         accessed November 19, 2022.
16       According to the work plan introduced in Chapter 4, the sequential analysis was implemented via
         summarising weekly folders. Within the framework of MaxQDA, the texts in these folders were
         coded both in chronological order and in due consideration of their origin/source. After the first
         step of the coding procedure (i.e. open coding of topics and subtopics) had been completed, the
         code system comprised 2.971 codings (i.e. passages in the texts that were attributed one or more
         codes; see Appendix A.2.1 for a MAXQDA extract displaying the management of documents in
         monthly folders/example: January 2014/Week 4; see Appendix A.2.2 for a screenshot of initial cod-
         ing, i.e. the topographic map of “EuroMaidan”.
122   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      quencing these dates reveals phases of conflict development that, at this point, serve as
      a guidance for the following sections (see table 9).



      Table 9: Phases of conflict development in Ukraine

                             November 21, 2013                   suspension of Association Agreement
           Phase I           (to) November 30, 2013              “cleaning” of Maidan by force
           Phase II
                             (to) December 17, 2013              “Russia-Ukraine-deal”
           Phase III
           Phase IV          (to) January 16, 2014               adoption of “anti-protest-laws”
                             (to) February 22, 2014              breakup of Ukrainian government

      (Own table)



          The following sections show how the Maidan protests, theoretically speaking, ab-
      sorbed more and more attention and resources from its communicative environment.
      To show this, the sequential mapping of the text corpus was translated into an iteratively
      generated analytical narrative, whereby the main threads are outlined as three paths of
      reading the conflict with different but overlapping foci. First, in the factual dimension, the
      key themes are portrayed (chapter 5.2). In this context, beyond a simple register of dis-
      cursive topics, the section illustrates how themes chronologically link together. At that,
      “EuroMaidan” played a crucial role as a kind of integrating umbrella term for an increas-
      ing number of thematic emphases during the protests. In a second step, the analytical
      focus lies on the “temporality of Maidan” (chapter 5.3). Since the whole case study is al-
      ready structured according to a sequential principle, the temporality of Maidan is not
      intended to be an outline of the chronology of events on Maidan. Rather, the temporal di-
      mension elaborates on how certain aspects of the past are actualised at a given moment
      of the conflict’s present and, accordingly, how plans and ideas about the future are con-
      densed in the here and now of the conflict. The temporal limits of pre-and post-conflict
      are thus variable, depending on those past events or future ideas being referred to as rel-
      evant to the conflict in the experienced present. In a third step, the case study deals with
      “Selfs and Others on Maidan” (chapter 5.4). Thus, focussing on the social dimension, the
      dynamics of emerging conflict identities and their relationship are illustrated. Beyond a
      mere development of the main parties to the conflict, the section is about the perceptions
      of each other and the corresponding expectations in the course of conflict.17 In the syn-
      opsis section (chapter 5.5), by recombing the previous three paths of reading the conflict
      and outlining the modes of observation that operate in the background, critical moments
      of conflict development are represented in detail.




      17       Nota bene: Internally, chapter 5.2. (factual dimension) and chapter 5.4. (social dimension) are
               structured by means of subtitles indicating the conflict phase (see definition of phases I to IV
               above). In order not to confuse chronology with temporality (as explained above), chapter 5.3. on
               the temporal dimension of the conflict, in turn, is structured according to the groups of sources.
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          123

5.2 EuroMaidan: Tracing the Career of a Pregnant Buzzword

     “Come on guys, let’s be serious. If you really want to change something, don’t just
     ‘like’ this post. Write that you are ready, and we can try to start something. Let’s meet
     at 10:30 p.m. near the monument to independence in the middle of Maidan.” (Nayem
     2014)


Phase I (Nov 21 – Nov 30)

In the evening of November 21, 2013, hundreds of activists and journalists immediately
reacted, particularly via social media services like Facebook, Twitter and VKontakte18 , to
the announcement that Ukraine’s government would suspend the signing of the Associ-
ation Agreement with the EU (see Onuch 2015: 227–231). In the course of this, Mustafa
Nayem’s Facebook post (see quote from Nayem 2014 above19 ) was portrayed as a major
trigger for the early stage of protest mobilisation on that day (MMIC 22.11.2013a; see also
Onuch 2015: 217). In the first night of the protests about 1.000 protesters met at Maidan,
Kiev’s Independence Square.
    The outset of the investigation period (starting with the early protests on Novem-
ber 21) is characterised by a certain moment of surprise. Indeed, there were many wary
voices from Ukrainian civil society towards the government, notably concerning its com-
mitment to an unquestioning orientation to the West.20 However, concerning its public
image, the government had beaten the big drum in favour of European integration for
months and, both rhetorically and concerning parliamentary decisions, left little doubt
about its firm intention to sign the Association Agreement at the imminent summit in
Vilnius21 , as e.g. First Vice Prime Minister Serhiy Arbuzov’s remarks before leaders of
parliamentary factions illustrates:




18    Similar to Facebook in the English-speaking world, VKontakte is a multilingual social media plat-
      form that is mainly used by Russian-speaking users.
19    Mustafa Nayem is a Ukrainian journalist who became widely known through his work for the inter-
      net newspaper Ukrayinska Pravda and an independent Ukrainian television channel, the TVi chan-
      nel. In the October 2014 parliamentary elections, he was elected to the Ukrainian parliament on
      the then president’s party list “Petro Porochenko Bloc Solidarity“.
20    Since there were several unannounced meetings between Yanucovych and Putin shortly before
      the summit in Vilnius, people became suspicious. At the same time, leading figures of the ruling
      Party of Regions declared that they would not support European integration “at any price” (UkrN
      15.11.2013; see also Kyiv Post 15.11.2013: 3) Additionally, the categorical refusal of the government
      to decide the “Tymoshenko-question”, which was a central condition of the EU, raised scepticism in
      Ukrainian society. Nota bene: After the Orange Revolution of 2004, Yulia Tymoshenko was Prime
      Minister in 2005 and from 2007 to 2010. When Yanucovych became president in 2010, Tymoshenko
      was sent to prison for seven years in court proceedings that international observers criticised as
      being politically motivated (see AI 19.11.2013).
21    The third Eastern Partnership summit was held in Vilnius, Lithuania, on 28–29 November 2013.
      It brought together heads of state or government from the 28 EU member states with those of
      Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine (see Joint Declaration of the Eastern
      Partnership Summit in Vilnius, 2.12.2013).
124   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

           “We need to take the final steps that will lead our country to a higher level of re-
           lations with the EU. I’d like to remind you that our responsibility is extremely high.
           […] The positive effects of integration the country can feel when our economy will
           interact with European economies on an equal footing. Your legal work will help en-
           sure European standards of life of our citizens. I hope that the proposed drafts [in
           preparation of the AA] will be taken.” (GovUkr 18.11.2013)

      Hence, in an atmosphere of (albeit slightly sceptical) EU-enthusiasm, the announcement
      of suspending the process of rapprochement with the EU for an indefinite period of time
      was clearly perceived as an abrupt U-turn in civil society. After the first wave of indigna-
      tion had erupted online and then crystallised around the notion of “EuroMaidan”22 , the
      political contradiction on the streets followed immediately:

           “Closer to midnight, hundreds of citizens came to Maidan Nezalezhnosti. Some of
           them had EU flags, some came with posters in support of the European future of
           Ukraine.” (MMIC 22.11.2013a)

           “On Thursday, November 21, Ukrainians went on the streets to show their pro-
           European stand. Promptly, quickly, and motivated.” (UkrN 23.11.2013)

      Right from the outset, the decision of the Ukrainian government was linked to the larger
      topic of security (“[…] for the benefit of Ukraine’s national security”; see introductory
      quote to Chapter 5., GovUkr 21.11.2013a). Thereby, economic considerations were de-
      scribed as a central part of national security, which was at this point declared to be inti-
      mately associated with a close (economic) cooperation within the framework of the Com-
      monwealth of Independent States23 :

           “The Resolution has been adopted with a view to study and work out a complex of
           measures in details, which Ukraine has to take in order to restore the lost production
           output and areas of trade and economic relations with Russia and other CIS member
           states, form an appropriate level of domestic market, which would provide equal
           relations between Ukraine and EU member states that is the basis of economic
           security of the state.” (GovUkr 21.11.2013a)




      22    During the analysis, it became apparent that the central reference term has been used in two or-
            thographical versions: “Euromaidan” and “EuroMaidan” with a capitalised internal letter. As fur-
            ther illustrations will show, observations referring to EuroMaidan do highlight both the desire to
            undoubtedly orientate Ukraine towards Europe (“Euro-“) and the idea of a sovereign country de-
            termining its fate independently through the will of its people, even when people express them-
            selves apart from the conventional political institutions, for example on “Independence Square”
            (“-Maidan”). Hereafter, to equally satisfy both dimensions, “EuroMaidan” will be used.
      23    The member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) are Armenia, Azerbaijan,
            Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgizstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. The regional organ-
            isation was formed after the breakup of the Soviet Union in 1991. In 2010, under the aegis of Russia,
            members of the CIS have established the Eurasian Customs Union (member states in 2015: Arme-
            nia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia), referred to as “Customs Union” hereafter.
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           125

     “Ukraine can never make a sacrifice of economic sovereignty, so the recent Govern-
     mental decision of Nov 21 concerning signing the Association Agreement with the
     EU was adopted in order not to afford social and economic fiasco and achieve more
     favourable conditions for Ukraine.” (GovUkr 27.11.2013e)

In marked contrast to the statements that highlight the government’s foreign (security)
policy decision as an economic necessity without any alternative, voices from civil soci-
ety disagreed and picked up the idea of national security differently. Under the header of
EuroMaidan, the protesters highlighted security notably as sovereignty of the Ukrainian
people and, therefore, as the possibility and the right to realise Ukraine’s self-determi-
nation as a European country through the will of its people:

     “Euromaidan – Citizens of Ukraine stand up and try to make their voice heard in Eu-
     rope which does not end at the eastern border of the EU. They fight for their Euro-
     pean future in a united Europe. […] Today, more than ever, Ukrainians need Europe’s
     attention. They need attention and support of the European citizens who already
     enjoy those European values.” (UkrN 24.11.2013)

In this context, EuroMaidan is mentioned in the same breath with desirable European
values “that have been commonly achieved after wars and crises in Europe’s history”
(UkrN 24.11.2013). In this regard, the Ukrainian civil society is represented as a ‘natural’
member of the ‘European family’ that expects other members to accept responsibility for
each other.24 Moreover, civil society’s unequivocal expectation towards the Europeans is
not to be passive and, particularly, not to give in towards neighbouring Russia that is ob-
served as a hegemonic power, which ruthlessly plays its trumps in the post-Soviet orbit:

     “What happened on November 21 in Kiev – the illegitimate decision of the Ukrainian
     government to stop the proceedings of the Association Agreement – is a moral, psy-
     chological, and political defeat of the EU. […] Russia doesn’t know compromise, nor
     balance of interests or win-win-situations. Russia’s policy is exclusively targeted at
     preserving its interests. In its foreign policy, Russia is guided by the idea that its role
     as a trading partner for energy resources like natural gas, crude oil, coal, or nuclear
     power is unique and indispensable.” (UkrN 28.11.2013)

As the analysed statements from civil society sources reveal, communication with ref-
erence to the Maidan protests tends to locate itself in a geopolitical context of ‘sink or
swim’, e.g. relating to issues of energy supply. On that account, the statements are par-
ticularly characterised by direct addresses towards the political, economic, and social en-
vironment in Europe and beyond.25 Hence, as the example of the references to European

24    As it can be retained from the topical analysis, the idea of being an obvious and self-evident part of
      Europe regularly appears in all phases of conflict development. Thereby, the images of “European
      family” and “common European values” run like a golden thread through civil society commen-
      taries and media reports (see exemplarily MMIC’s (17.02.2014a) commentary on “Ukraine’s return-
      ing to the European family” or The Ukrainian Week’s (22.11.2013) article on the “Homo Europaeus”).
25    As the opening (which was triggered by an unprecedented “storm” of social media) made clear, Eu-
      roMaidan immediately adopted a “corporate design” (e.g. EuroMaidan as catchphrase, use of na-
126   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      values shows, observers are called upon to take up the point and to react in one way or
      the other. This is all the more true for media coverage.
          According to the analysed media reports, EuroMaidan, at least in its initial phase,
      represents a kind of unconventional societal venue for debating a specific foreign policy
      issue: the decision of the government to suspend the signature of the AA with the EU.26
      Largely, media reports adopted the interpretation after which this decision constitutes
      a turning away from the process of European integration in the west and thus a turning
      to Russia in the east, although the government frequently made an effort to balance this
      reproach:

           “The Government guarantees: Ukraine will further its course towards European in-
           tegration, as it is for the benefit of Ukraine, for the benefit of our nation.” (GovUkr
           28.11.2013)

      In sum, the analysed media reports offered three main views of the situation: First, the
      Government’s decision is located between the (normative) poles of Europe as the embod-
      iment of “established values, self-improvement, discipline and development” as opposed
      to “the world of complete unpredictability, paternalism, hierarchies, absolute power and
      inert obedience” (The Ukrainian Week, 22.11.2013: 6). Second, the suspension of the AA
      with the EU is portrayed as a policy question that can be, in principle, rationalised in
      terms of economically quantifiable pros and cons:

           “President Viktor Yanucovych in a recent speech said that the total cost would be $217
           billion, roughly equal to the nation’s annual economic output. Kyiv officials insisted
           on compensation. […] EU enlargement commissioner Stefan Füle said the so-called
           ajustment costs cited by Ukraine are ‘neither proportional nor credible. This deeply
           contradicts the experience of the EU accession countries’.” (Kyiv Post 29.11.2013: 7)

      However, the image of the societal debate about European integration, as the analysed
      media sketched it, is not only shaped by economic considerations. Third, it is also de-
      scribed as a strategic decision, which is directly linked to great power politics:

           “Russia intensified its trade and other economic-related sanctions toward Ukraine
           this year to dissuade it from pursuing closer ties with Europe.” (Kyiv Post 29.11.2013:
           7)




            tional and European colours, no political party symbols; see Kyiv Post 29.11.2013: 16–18) and devel-
            oped professionalised media strategies. “Attention can only be gained through media campaigns:
            Short reports about people on the many EuroMaidans; telling their stories will make it possible to
            raise other Europeans’ awareness for what is happening in Ukraine.” (UkrN 24.11.2013)
      26    Following the example of EuroMaidan in Kiev, the media reported on further “EuroMaidans” com-
            ing up in Lviv, Lutsk, Ternopil, Donetsk, Kharkiv and other Ukrainian cities in all parts of the coun-
            try: “Organizers of EuroMaidan have been spectacularly successful at turning out tens of thousands
            of people on the streets of Kyiv and other cities in Ukraine and enlisting support internationally in
            opposition to the government’s decision.” (KyivPost 29.11.2013: 6).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          127

It can be stated that, in the first phase, the protests on Maidan were principally referred
to under the nominal header of EuroMaidan, according to the sources of the analysed
text corpora. Thereby, the political contradiction crystallised around the announcement
that the Ukrainian government would not sign the AA with the EU at the imminent
summit of Vilnius. After the government definitely carried out its announcement, this
decision seemed to sound the bell for a period of strained relations between the EU
and Ukraine. Subsequently, EuroMaidan again attained an unprecedent level both con-
cerning the throng and the determination, as published interviews with protesters on
Maidan illustrate:

     “EuroMaidan will turn into a ‘massive watchdog’ focused on putting pressure on the
     government to follow through with its initial promise to sign the association and
     free trade deal with the EU at a later date. […] Smaller, more radical factions of Euro-
     Maidan [can] organize themselves and storm government buildings. But [we] would
     prefer peaceful, ‘more European’ demonstrations. […] We would like to see methods
     of civil disobedience.” (Interview with Oleg Rybachuk27 , Kyiv Post 29.11.2013: 6)

Related to statements as the above cited, the topic of public security and – associated
with this – a debate about legitimate means of protest increasingly dominated the dis-
cursive agenda of EuroMaidan in the aftermath of Vilnius where, from the perspective
of the protesters on Maidan, a unique opportunity had been missed while the movement
realised that it was not able to change anything in Ukraine’s policy to this date. This mo-
ment of self-awareness, together with the protesters’ (and INGOs’) observations in the
night of November 30/December 1 mark the first turning point in EuroMaidan’s topical
sequence:

     “At 4 a.m. this morning the troops of riot police, Berkut, violently dispersed the
     peaceful Euromaidan at Independence Square.” (MMIC 30.11.2013b)

     “According to eyewitnesses interviewed by Amnesty International, Berkut offi-
     cers first told the demonstrators to disperse because the demonstration was ‘illegal’,
     then started to beat those that remained. Video footage shows Berkut officers
     beating protestors and in some cases pursuing men and women in order to beat
     them. About 35 people have so far been charged with hooliganism under the Ad-
     ministrative Code and dozens of people are being treated for their injuries.” (AI
     30.11.2013)

Phase II (Nov 30 – Dec 17)

After police forces began to clear Maidan by force, at one blow, EuroMaidan was observed
in an altogether different light. Immediately, the main topics debated changed from the



27    Oleg Rybachuk served in high-level state functions, e.g. as chief of staff to former president Viktor
      Yushchenko. During the Maidan protests, he is referred to as a public activist and leading Euro-
      maidan figure (see e.g. Kyiv Post 29.11.2013: 6).
128   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      rather abstract controversial subject of geopolitical, economic and social merits of Euro-
      pean integration to very concrete issues, e.g. concerning the right to peaceful assembly
      and freedom of expression.
          Due to EuroMaidan’s high level of attention from (social) media and INGOs, reports
      on the incidences on November 30 spread immediately. In fact, for the first time since the
      beginning of the protests, large-scale collective violence between protesters (throwing
      stones) and police forces (deploying teargas and batons) was observed. According to the
      analysed documents from civil society opposition, November 30 was also the starting
      point for new human rights initiatives emerging from EuroMaidan.28 In this context,
      the responsibility for the outrages was clearly attributed to the authorities:

           “Unlawful use of force to subdue the EuroMaidan demonstration: President Yanu-
           vovych’s brutal and unsparing use of force to quash Ukrainian citizens’ rights of
           peaceful assembly and speech.” (MMIC 2.12.2013a)

           “The context of the events leaves no doubt that the order to commit crimes against
           peaceful citizens came from the highest echelons of power.” (UHHRU 1.12.2013)

      Referring to this, the analysed media reports involved detailed accounts on the night
      of November 30, which resulted in hundreds of casualties, including particularly
      protesters, at least 40 journalists and about 100 officers of special police units.29 Thus,
      media coverage addressed the use of force both by the police and by the protesters:

           “On Nov. 30, all the evidence shows that police were the instigators of a deliberate
           and violent crackdown on 400 or so demonstrators. Eyewitnesses and video showed
           indiscriminate beatings. […] As for Dec. 1, we’d definitely like to know who comman-
           deered a bulldozer and three Molotov cocktails at police. Those are illegal, violent
           and potentially dangerous acts that can be punished, not merely ‘provocations”. (Kyiv-
           Post 6.12.2013: 4)

      In the light of these incidences, massive public indignation translated into resurgent
      protests early in December when about 100.000 protesters gathered on Maidan. Shortly
      after this new wave of protests started, the government, at least rhetorically, accepted




      28    See e.g. “EuromaidanSOS” mentioned earlier; the organisation was committed to collecting and
            publishing information on human rights violations. For this purpose, an independent public com-
            mission to investigate actions of the authorities (and the protesters) in Kiev and across Ukraine
            during the protests was established, whereby existing human rights organisations and lawyers
            were invited to join the commission (see UHHRU 3.12.2013a).
      29    To be exact, considerations about the concrete attribution of responsibility (in the sense of or-
            der/execution) played an important role in media reports, see exemplarily KyivPost (6.12.2013: 8):
            “It is unclear who exactly gave the order for Berkut to attack. Speculation ranges from President
            Viktor Yanukovych and Interior Minister Vitaliy Zakharchenko.”
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           129

responsibility for the events on November 3030 and, at the same time, pointed out that
state authorities had enough power to put the Maidan protests in their place at any time:

     “On behalf of the government, I’d like to apologize for the actions of our law enforce-
     ment agencies on Maidan. Both the president and the Government deeply regret
     what happened.” (Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, speech in Parliament; GovUkr
     3.12.2013d)

     “We are ready to discuss with peaceful demonstrators all terms of our agree-
     ments. We stretch out our hand. If we find a fist, I say frankly – we have enough
     forces.” (Mykola Azarov, GovUkr 3.12.2013e)

Notwithstanding the above, in the first week of December, protesters began to openly
term their project as a “revolution” (e.g. in statements, on banners and as graffiti) and
started to block and/ or occupy government buildings (e.g. Cabinet building, Kiev’s city
administration). Furthermore, feeling certain about the broad support of a cross-cleav-
age mass movement behind, EuroMaidan’s revolutionary voices confidently called for the
president and the government to resign as a precondition for any peaceful transition.31
    As opposed to this, the government straightaway appealed to the protesters that
those practices do not represent the “European way” of expressing civil society’s will (see
GovUkr 3.12.2013f), especially as a majority of Ukrainian citizens beyond the capital is
described as being supporters of the government.32 Therefore, the government rejected
the blocking of governmental bodies as an illegitimate means since it is equivalent to a
blocking of the state’s social life veins (e.g. entailing negative repercussions for the pay-
ment of pensions and social assistance; GovUkr 4.12.2013a). Concerning the demands to
resign, it was clearly stated:




30    At the same time, government officials tried to portray the use of force by the police as a reaction
      to “provocations” from the protesters’ side (e.g. throwing of bottles and stones), tracing back to the
      far-right spectrum on Maidan (see GovUkr 5.12.2013l). In contrast, according to the assessment of
      KyivPost (6.12.2013: 4), even if there were such provocations, chasing people down the streets and
      beating them indiscriminately is here seen as an entirely disproportionate reaction. According to
      the analysed media reports, those overreactions can also be explained by miscalculation, or, in
      other words, by the “unpreparedness for the scale of the rally on November 24. […] It appears that
      the government counted – and still does – on organizational impotence of the protesters” (The
      Ukrainian Week 3.12.2013: 10–11).
31    In this context, the protagonists are pointing to an increasing “common sense of Ukrainian iden-
      tity” that is believed to sustain a peaceful transition realised by “a short-term unity government
      of technocrats” that would be empowered to implement “tough reforms Ukraine needs to avoid
      short-term economic collapse and to restore credibility to a judiciary” (MMIC 4.12.2013b).
32    Here, government statements refer to sessions of Ukrainian regional councils, “in which three
      fourth of our population” is represented and “the support for the course of the President and the
      Government had been approved” (GovUkr 2.12.2013a; see also GovUkr 6.12.2013c). It was one of
      the most cited arguments in government communication that society, by a majority, supported
      the president and its government. In contrast, at this point, media reports increasingly attested
      “an enormous disconnect between the government and the people.” (KyivPost 6.12.2013: 1).
130   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

           “We stand for an issue of power to be solved exceptionally through elections.”
           (GovUkr 5.12.2013c)

      Together with other statements confirming the role of the Ukrainian military as a guar-
      antor of security and stability on occasion of the Day of the Armed Forces (see GovUkr
      6.12.2013a), those messages show a certain determination on the government’s side to
      defend the “national interest”, i.e. the interests of the majority of Ukrainians that had
      elected the president and were not (yet) present on Maidan (see GovUkr 6.12.2013e). By
      contrast, protesters on Maidan and supporters of the political opposition who arrived
      from all parts of Ukraine “don’t always behave as they should” were thus portrayed as
      being a “serious threat to the security of our citizens” (GovUkr 6.12.2013f). At the same
      time, while confirming to continue negotiations with the EU, the government announced
      its new initiative to conclude a strategic partnership with Russia. Thereby, speculations
      about Ukraine’s clandestine orientation to the east were fuelled:

           “Russian leadership has stated clearly that the signing of the [Association] Agree-
           ment means that it makes no sense to further discuss trade and economic regimes.
           We were told clearly: we are ready to discuss the problems in a tripartite format but
           you should postpone the signing of the Agreement, then we’ll sit at the table for
           negotiations, and then sign it.” (Interview with Prime Minister Azarov, The Ukrainian
           Week 3.12.2013: 8)

      Although pertinent statements suggest that the president and the government denied
      preferring (and aiming at) a closer integration within the framework of the Russia-led
      CU, other statements confirmed that issues of industrial cooperation, trade and eco-
      nomic relations and gas issues were topics of newly opened negotiations with Russia (see
      e.g. GovUkr 7.12.2013a). In marked contrast to these government statements that out-
      lined the rapprochement to Russia as a necessary counteraction to an externally caused
      recession33 , the analysed media point to the “homemade nature” of the economic decline
      and the possible dire consequences for the government:

           “Chronicle of a systematic recession: The factors triggering this decline are at home,
           not abroad, as the government insists.” (The Ukrainian Week 3.12.2013: 18–19).

           “But time is against them. Every day that the protests persist, political risks increase,
           and the economy, already in recession, suffers more and more. The government’s
           debts, such as wage and pension arrears, which already amount to some $10 bil-
           lion, are increasing, diminishing the government’s chances for survival.” (KyivPost
           6.12.2013: 4)




      33    In this context, president Yanucovych stressed trade the turnover with Russia as an essential fac-
            tor in Ukrainian national economy: “If trade with Russia deteriorates, jobs would be lost. This
            year 85.000 people lost their jobs in industry, 32.000 in trade, 17.000 in transport and 15.000
            in construction.” (Interview with four Ukrainian TV channels on December 2, citied in KyivPost
            6.12.2013: 6)
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014            131

At this point, in an effort to correspond to the still pressing claims of EuroMaidan,
the parties of the political opposition noticeably entered the stage of EuroMaidan.34
Yet, neither the initiation of a no-confidence vote in parliament (on December 3) nor
the attempt to block the parliament simply by absence (December 4–6) advanced the
declared purpose: the resignation of the government.35 Against this background, the
protests on Maidan rapidly sparked at a higher level. According to the analysed civil
society sources and media reports, on December 8, between 500.000 and one million
protesters gathered on Maidan in a “March of Millions” seeking the resignation of the
government within 48 hours. In the course of this, further government buildings were
blocked, existing barricades were reinforced, and additional tents were set up. Following
civil society sources, the protests in this phase again changed their character:

     “There are more people on the streets today than last week, and more than we ever
     saw during the Orange Revolution. […] Whereas last week people were guided by
     their emotional reaction to the Nov 30 beatings, today people [come] motivated by
     a rational desire to be part of a revolutionary change.” (MMIC 9.12.2013)

Moreover, supporters of EuroMaidan referred to themselves in terms of strategic ad-
vances: Even though special police forces tried to dismantle the barricades, protesters
were able to maintain their positions on Maidan square and in the occupied buildings
(particularly Kiev’s city administration).36 To underline their immediate claims (release




34    At that time, there are three political opposition parties referred to as the most important ones: 1.
      All-Ukrainian Union Fatherland: Arseniy Yatsenyuk (leader), party of imprisoned opposition leader
      and former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko, Ukraine’s biggest opposition party (89 seats in
      parliament; total: 450 seats); 2. Ukrainian Democratic Alliance for Reform (UDAR): Vitali Klitchko
      (leader), second largest opposition party (42 seats in parliament), ideology similar to Germany’s
      Christian Democrats, strong parliament faction, weak regional units; 3. All-Ukrainian Union Svoboda
      [Freedom]: Oleh Tyahnbok (leader), grassroots party that gained mass popularity, with an aggres-
      sive radical wing and xenophobic ideas, goal: creation of a nationalist state, methods: political and
      militant (characterisation based on KyivPost 14.02.2014: 2–5). For a detailed account on the role of
      political parties during the Maidan protests see Malygina (2013: 4–5), Marples (2014: 11–12) or Ba-
      nakh (2014).
35    On the contrary, the government’s reaction suggests that it interpreted the situation as if it had
      gained further legitimisation to stay in power: “Yesterday the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine has ex-
      pressed confidence by a majority vote to our Government. This is an unambiguous solution of
      the only legitimate legislative body of our country. And it must be accepted as a legal fact by all.”
      (GovUkr 4.12.2013a; see e.g. KyivPost 6.12.2013: 4)
36    Spurred by the encouragement on International Human Rights Day (December 10), the protesters
      unfearfully articulated that their rights and freedoms had been violated and that they would
      continue this struggle for the right to live in a democratic and European country (see e.g. MMIC
      10.12.2013c). As media coverage highlighted, this struggle was backed by a successful fundraising
      campaign since EuroMaidan activists were not only able to raise monetary donations but also tan-
      gibles worth millions, such as food, clothing, fuel, medicine, and labour (as to logistic organisation,
      public relations, and legal assistance).
132   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      of arrested protesters, punishment of those responsible for the beatings, end of repres-
      sions), even survey data37 was brought into public effect:

           Among reasons, which made people came out to the Maidan, three most widespread
           were: brutal beatings of demonstrators at the Maidan on November 30 night and
           repressions (70%), Viktor Yanucovych’s refusal to sign the AA with the EU (53.5%) and
           desire to change life in Ukraine (50%). Rather pronounced were also desire to change
           authorities in Ukraine (39%). The majority of Maidan protesters (72%) answered that
           they would stay there ‘as long as necessary’. (DIF 10.12.2013)

      Based on the analysed statements, the government’s reaction at this point was twofold:
      On the one hand, the president carried out the (former presidents’) idea of inviting all
      political forces, the clergy, and representatives of EuroMaidan to a national roundtable
      in which Yanucovych would participate in person. In this context, under the header of
      dialogue and compromise, the government again confirmed its pro-European course,
      promised a complete investigation of the violent incidences of the preceding weeks, and
      offered a broad participation in order to manage the current crisis. On the other hand,
      it accused its addressees of being responsible for the situation by provoking and fuelling
      tension on the streets, by spreading misinformation and insecurity, by endangering es-
      sential state functions, by being unorganised and not able to bear political responsibility
      and, most importantly, by confusing a noisy minority with the pro-government majority
      in Ukraine’s society as a whole (see e.g. GovUkr 11.12.2013a).38
           The analysed media reports picked up these Janus-faced public signals of the govern-
      ment: While the president issued invitations for a national roundtable of dialogue,

           “Early on Dec. 11 the stakes were raised when riot police and National Guardsmen
           attempted to disperse the protest calling for the government’s ouster.” (KyivPost
           13.12.2013: 1).

      Moreover, based on an increasing number of reports about violent incidences (e.g. con-
      cerning the use of teargas and batons while trying to ‘clear’ the city administration and
      dismantle barricades) and about the first severe court sentences of arrested protesters,
      media coverage was particularly characterised by further signals of ‘raising stakes’:

           “EuroMaidan supporters emerged from their all-night clashes with police early Dec.
           11 even more defiant and determined. They built even bigger barricades after po-

      37    On December 7 and 8, the Democratic Initiatives Foundation (DIF) (in cooperation with the Kyiv In-
            ternational Institute of Sociology) conducted a survey among protesters on Maidan (random sam-
            ple, 1037 respondents) to figure out key motivations and demands. The DIF calls itself a “leading
            Ukrainian think tank and focuses its activities on developing reasonable recommendations in the
            sphere of democratic transformations and Ukraine’s European integration for decision makers and
            civil society representatives.” It was founded in 1992 and is particularly engaged in research, mon-
            itoring and dissemination of information about political processes and public opinion polls (see
            DIF 2015).
      38    In this context, EuroMaidan was even blamed for jeopardising the chances to host the 2022 Winter
            Olympiad in Lviv (GovUkr 12.12.2013a).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014        133

     lice and emergencies ministry workers removed them during the night. Moreover,
     new massive rallies are planned through the weekend starting on Dec. 13. […] For
     its part, the ruling Party of Regions is planning a rival rally. Andriy Pinchuk, leader
     of the party’s youth wing, said 200.000 people are expected to arrive in Kyiv to op-
     pose those at Independence Square. Many observers fear that all on the government
     payroll will be forced to take part (KyivPost 13.12.2013: 14)

At this point, statements from the protest movement on Maidan were not only marked
by a certain distrust concerning the credibility of Yanucovych’s roundtable but also, and
particularly, concerning the negotiations about the new cooperation agreement between
Ukraine and Russia that had constantly been promoted39 and would be signed on Decem-
ber 17:

     “Yanukovych and Putin pencilled a significant economic rescue package for Ukraine,
     but the Russian President added a condition: all protests in Kyiv must be cleared
     before the December 17 official signing date. For this reason, Yanukovych, in a hurry
     to clear the protesters from Independence Square, ordered riot police into the streets
     of Kyiv.” (MMIC 12.12.2013a)

Distrust mounted up even more, when, on December 15, the European Commission
announced that talks (about any form of cooperation) with the Ukrainian government
would be suspended due to contradictory signals from president Yanucovych.40 In sum,
in this phase, releases associated with the civil society opposition depicted an atmo-
sphere of increasing confrontation and insecurity.41 At the same time, however, after
severe common experiences, the attitude of having reached a certain point of no return
became more and more apparent, even despite most difficult weather conditions:

     “The stand-off between the protestors on Independence Square and the regime
     continues with no end in sight. The Euromaidan is in no hurry to disperse. […]
     The regime has attacked peaceful demonstrators in the center of Ukraine’s capital
     three times (Nov. 30, Dec. 1, Dec. 11). This fact has consolidated Ukraine’s people in


39    In doing so, the government lost no opportunity to point to the economic disadvantages of the
      alternative, see e.g. GovUkr (13.12.2013f): “In September the three countries of the CU approved a
      decision that in case the agreement on free trade area with the EU was signed, Ukraine would lose
      advantages of a free trade area with the CIS member countries. During the year it would add to the
      negative balance another USD 8 billion. And then the negative balance of trade with the countries
      of the CU in 2014 would make up USD 15 billion.”
40    Besides Ukraine’s obscure initiatives to intensify relations with Russia and the harsh crackdown of
      the Maidan protests, incidences in the context of the parliamentary by-elections on December 15
      raised EU’s scepticism: While 4 of 5 seats were won by Yanucovych allies, irregularities (including
      vote buying and unauthorised persons present inside the polling stations) had been observed (see
      e.g. MMIC 17.12.2013b).
41    INGO reports substantiated this widely shared perception by highlighting single cases of dispro-
      portionate use of force and ill-treatment of detained protesters by police forces, especially by
      Berkut units (see e.g. AI 13.12.2013). Nota bene: The Berkut (Ukrainian for “Golden Eagles“) was
      a special police force in Ukraine. This unit was particularly deployed to contain demonstrations
      and violent upheavals. In late February 2014, the new government dissolved the Berkut.
134   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

          protest: people want personal dignity, rules-based government, and peace. (MMIC
          15.12.2013a)

          “It is ridiculously cold out there. As the week wore on, protesters learned how
          to make the cold their ally. Protesters poured water outside Revolution HQ to create
          an ice-rink for the officers to slip on. Demonstrators chipped the ice and used it to
          reinforce the barricades. They built walls by stacking sacks of snow. The Maidan is
          no longer a public square; it’s a winter fortress.” (MMIC 15.12.2013b)

      Seemingly not being responsive to the determination of EuroMaidan protests at this
      stage, statements from the government place special emphasis on the economic situa-
      tion. In this view, due to the new deal between Ukraine and Russia, which was ultimately
      negotiated and signed on December 17, a decisive turning point was reached: As Russia
      agreed to buy state bonds worth 15 billion USD and to reduce the gas price from 400 to
      270 USD/1000m3 , Ukraine would not only be able to face the severe economic crisis in all
      markets (under conditions of a global crisis) but also, as Prime Minister Mykola Azarov
      outlined, to become

          “[…] perhaps the only European country that continues the policy of raising social
          standards, an increase wages, pensions and social security. […] Agreements of pres-
          idents of Ukraine and Russia allow us to plan the coming years, as the years of de-
          velopment and confidence of peoples in stability of course of life. Therefore, we will
          not allow anyone to undermine the situation, which has been normalized in such
          difficult efforts. (GovUkr 18.12.2013a)

      Phase III (17 Dec – 16 Jan)

      After the “Russia-Ukraine-Deal” had been concluded, the government’s public commu-
      nication was marked by an effort to send appeasing signals: Once again, European in-
      tegration and the rapprochement to European (normative) standards were declared key
      priorities of the government (see e.g. GovUkr 19.12.2013a). To emphasise this intention,
      the parliament adopted a law on the amnesty of detained Maidan protesters. Though,
      the law was also intended to grant amnesty for those members of the police and special
      forces that had been accused of disproportionate use of force against protesters. The par-
      liamentary opposition parties responded to this perceived affront by quitting the presi-
      dent’s roundtable (which Yanucovych yet left before) while protesters on Maidan felt even
      more vindicated “to remove a corrupt regime and link their nation’s future to the values
      and norms of the EU” (MMIC 19.12.2013b). According to the analysed media, Yanucovych
      flaunted the deal with Russia and enjoyed presenting himself in the role of a skilful ne-
      gotiator. At the same time, the population, at least the EuroMaidanian part of it, was
      supposed not to follow his assessment:

          “’This loan was definitely very lucrative because Russia didn’t make any conditions
          for us’, Yanukovych said. He confirmed a freeze in relations with the EU in favor of a
          tilt back towards Moscow. [He] insisted that he did not offer in return to join Putin’s
          pet project – a Eurasian customs union. […] He called the EuroMaidan demonstra-
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          135

     tions against him a ’low blow’.” (KyivPost 20.12.2013: 2)

     “The nation now knows two things for sure: Russia is our new friend, and it paid a
     price of $15 billion and cheaper gas for this friendship.” (KyivPost 20.12.2013: 4).

Notwithstanding the above, further government releases stated the declared merits of
the deal, including a strengthening of Ukraine’s (economic and financial) independence
and an improvement of its social stability (e.g. by acquiring a stronger position in IMF
negotiations and by enabling the state to increase its welfare spending; see e.g. GovUkr
21.12.2013d). Driven by the sudden dynamics in the course of the Russia-Ukraine-deal42 ,
as portrayed in the analysed media, protesters on Maidan were put on the spot to change
their strategy in order to achieve progress concerning the long-term goals and thus not
to lose their broad public support.43 At this point, opposition party leaders discovered
their chance to offer EuroMaidan a political venue:

     “Opposition leaders today announced the creation of the Maidan political movement
     […] that will target ‘a new constitution and removal of corrupt judges and prosecu-
     tors’, said Arseniy Yatsenyuk.” (MMIC 23.12.2013a)

Triggered by the beating of a prominent journalist and opposition activist on Decem-
ber 25, Tetyana Chornovol44 , the protests again picked up pace and drew attention to the
newly established “alliance” of opposition party leaders and EuroMaidan activists. Moti-
vated by restored passion, protesters claimed the resignation Ukraine’s interior minister
(see MMIC 26.12.2013a).
    As the year was drawing to the end, government statements are characterised by a
mixture of stressing the main achievements and blaming the (civil society) opposition.
In this context, the government referred to its positive economic performance, including
e.g. the fulfilment of social obligations (salaries, pensions, allowances etc.), the stabilisa-
tion of the economy (stopping recession, removing trade restrictions) and the improve-
ment of consumers’ situation (stopping devaluation of the currency, stabilising tariffs
and prices). According to the government, all of this was even exceeded (and backed up)


42    Against the background of Yanucovych’s repeated public warnings to Europe and the US not to
      meddle in Ukraine’s domestic affairs, INGOs observed an incrasing number of violations of free-
      dom of assembly, of freedom of expression, as well as unfair trials and abusive use of force against
      activitsts and journalists (see AI 23.12.2013).
43    Indeed, difficult weather conditions and increasing repression by the government began to de-
      moralise the protest movement. At the same time, as the analysed media reports highlight, there
      was a quite presentable list of EuroMaidan’s victories: “Virtually all people arrested after Decem-
      ber 1 clashes were released; several top officials were under investigation for the violent crackdown
      on peaceful protesters, and the main thing: Ukraine did not enter the CU!” (The Ukrainian Week
      23.12.2013: 4).
44    Tetyana Chornovol is a 36-year-old deputy (People’s Front) of the Verkhovna Rada. During (and
      already before) EuroMaidan she worked as a Ukrainian opposition activist and journalist. Thereby,
      she was known for her investigations about corruption among senior state officials. According to
      civil society sources, she was assaulted “near the capital Kiev hours after an article she had wrote
      on the assets of top government officials was published.” (MMIC 25.12.2013b)
136   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      by the decision to suspend the course of European integration in order to materialise
      national interests within the framework of a strengthened cooperation with Russia, re-
      ferred to as “historic”:

           “Current year ends by historic agreements of presidents of Ukraine and Russia.
           Restoration of full partnership with Russia averted the worst scenario for our econ-
           omy. Finally, the fair market price for gas was determined, restrictions in mutual
           trade were lifted, and strategic projects in industrial cooperation were determined.
           Russia in a very short time had decided to allocate Ukraine a credit in the amount
           of $ 15 billion on very favorable terms. Now there is no doubt in financial stability
           of Ukraine.” (GovUkr 31.12.2013a)

      On the other hand, the government blamed EuroMaidan for campaigns of disinforma-
      tion about the government’s agenda (concerning an alleged Moscow-induced accession
      to the CU; GovUkr 24.12.2013a), for economic naivety (concerning rising consumer
      prices after the AA; GovUkr 27.1.22013a) and, most importantly, for hiding their true
      intention behind noble speak of Europe and democracy: the fight for power (see GovUkr
      27.12.2013d).
          In contrast, end-of-year reviews from civil society opposition make use of a broad
      “historic” perspective to spell out their attributed meaning of EuroMaidan:

           “In Kiev’s Independence Square, hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians have gathered,
           and there they remain, demanding that the regime respect their dignity. The actions
           have demonstrated more than just the courage and resilience of the Ukrainian peo-
           ple. They have allowed us to see the cowardice and treachery of the ruling regime.
           They have laid bare to the world Vladimir Putin’s new doctrine and his attempts to
           create a new version of the USSR (MMIC 31.12.2013d)

      As further statements show, in this perspective, EuroMaidan represented itself as an
      all-Ukrainian movement (including ‘traditional’ opposition parties) that not only fights
      for an elimination of state repression and a democratisation of the political system in
      Ukraine but also for setting a successful example of reform for other post-Soviet coun-
      tries (see e.g. MMIC 31.12.2013b, d).
          After tens of thousands peacefully celebrated New Year’s on Maidan45 , the beginning
      of the year was characterised by a sparse information policy of the government while the
      EuroMaidan camp continued to deliver “status reports”. At this point, more and more na-
      tionalist or even far-right militant factions began to become rhetorically and physically
      visible on Maidan (e.g. by holding a torchlight procession on New Year’s Eve) and to argue
      in favour of more radical measures. Nevertheless, statements from EuroMaidan suggest
      that the core of the protesters was still convinced that such strategies would jeopardise



      45    On this occasion, the following New Year’s greeting in various languages (along with individual
            snapshots) from Maidan protesters was published on MMIC’s website: “Dear friends! We, Ukraini-
            ans, would like to express our sincere gratitude for your support in our struggle for freedom and
            human dignity. We wish you all a peaceful and fulfilling New Year!” (MMIC 6.01.2014)
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014        137

the true power of the movement: its diversity. According to this view, in the weeks be-
fore, EuroMaidan had developed into an “impressive cross cleavage coalition” which in-
volved like-minded people of all ages and backgrounds: activists, organisations of writ-
ers, students, journalists, sports people, experts, show business representatives, ecolo-
gists, medical workers, lawyers, military veterans, trade unions, opposition party leaders
and their supporters, clerical leaders and believers of all faiths.46 To draw on more rad-
ical strategies would thus not only result in a massive bloodshed but also in a possible
breakup of the EuroMaidan movement and, as a consequence, in a breakup of the coun-
try (see MMIC 1.01.2014). In sum, despite ongoing and new forms of intimidation and
repression47 , EuroMaidan described itself as an exceptional social movement that, up to
this point, had achieved a great deal and, on the other side, was uncertain about how to
continue the whole project:

     “Whatever the eventual outcome, this is an event that has marked the lives of
     thousands of people and transformed Ukrainian civil society. […] At present Mr
     Yanukovych’s position does not appear to be in danger. But it is very hard to imag-
     ine that the whole astonishing scene could end with a whimper. The fate of this
     movement, which took Ukraine by surprise when it started, is scarcely any more
     predictable now than it was in November.” (MMIC 7.01.2014)

In marked contrast to this self-description, government statements highlighted that
protests, barricades, and occupations had achieved nothing so far but creating political,
social and particularly economic disturbances (see e.g. GovUkr 8.01.2014a). As compared
to this, the government presented itself as guarantor of stability and development that
was able to ensure concrete improvements for the people, such as stable gas prices or
reliable social payments. In this regard, Prime Minister Azarov particularly vaunted the
Russia-Ukraine-deal as an adequate measure to “resolve fundamental problems of sus-
tainability of state finances and economic development” as well as to create “hundreds
of thousands of jobs” in relation to the free trade agreements within the CIS (see GovUkr
9.01.2014a; 10.01.2014d).
    Considering that the anti-government protests on Maidan had been an uncoordi-
nated association in the first phases, at this point, there was increasing evidence for an
unprecedented quality of organisation and countrywide coordination of EuroMaidan.
In this context, the constitution of the “All-Ukraine Euromaidan Forum” in mid-January
represented both a highly symbolic act and a pragmatic move towards creating a kind




46    See particularly MMIC (3.01.2014a; 4.01.2014a; 5.01.2014a).
47    Here, the example of “AutoMaidan” can be cited as pertinent: As AutoMaidan had implemented
      various campaigns in the weeks before (e.g. protests by car to block the streets or car processions
      to the president’s and other high positions’ controversial residences outside Kiev), the govern-
      ment established a new traffic police special force to prohibit demonstrations by car. Moreover,
      AutoMaidan activists and journalists who took part had visits and were threatened at home (see
      MMIC 3.01.2014c).
138   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      of representative planning authority for EuroMaidan.48 Therefore, its first resolutions
      included issues of nationwide communication and coordination:

           “The Forum also approved a new joint defence strategy, a transparent and secure
           budgeting mechanism, a plan for artistic cooperation between cities, a joint infor-
           mation strategy and a civic education plan designed to increase the number of eu-
           romaidan activists. In addition, the Forum approved a strategy for spreading euro-
           maidan ideas outside of the protest movement as a top priority.” (MMIC 13.01.2014)

      According to EuroMaidan statements, the first meeting of the forum in Kharkiv (January
      11–12) was attacked several times: online attacks on the organisers’ website, repeated acts
      of arson and vandalism against offices, police persecution of activists, and brutal aggres-
      sion by unknown thugs against leaders and journalists reporting from the forum.49 In
      this phase, the analysed reports revealed that EuroMaidan activists observed themselves
      not only as opposed to the government and its security forces. Also, they acted as coun-
      terpart of an emerging pro-government camp from civil society that protested in favour
      of ‘law and order’, the Russia-Ukraine-deal and Yanucovych’s stay in office till the end
      of the term (see MMIC 14.01.2014a). In this situation, reports from INGOs talk about
      new attempts of police forces to disperse and beat peaceful protesters on Maidan. At this
      point at the latest, it was taken as demonstrated that there was a well-planned strategy
      to subdue public debate and activism by force. As a consequence, the immediate resig-
      nation of the minister of the interior, Vitaly Zaharchenko, was claimed (see e.g. UHHRU
      13.01.2014).
           To protest against the government’s dealing with EuroMaidan and the increasing vi-
      olation of human rights in Ukraine, the political opposition parties decided to block the
      parliament on January 15, right before the scheduled adoption of the 2014 budget, as long
      as a commission of inquiry would be installed to shed light on the massive use of force by
      police units on Maidan. In the government’s view, this measure represented as a serious
      provocation, as Prime Minister Mykola Azarov’s statements illustrate:

           “I want that all citizens realize: the opposition wants to force responsibility to the
           authorities for possible delay in payments of increased salaries to state employees,
           social benefits for mothers and children, the disabled persons, etc. due to not passed
           budget. […] I ask if the people of Ukraine need a destabilization of the social and
           economic life. Especially in times of global economic crisis. The answer is clear: those
           who are blocking the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine continue to work against Ukraine.”
           (GovUkr 15.01.2014a)




      48    According to its founders, the forum had its origins in a meeting of Ukrainian pro-democracy ac-
            tivists who participated in Kiev’s EuroMaidan in late December 2013. There, they had the idea to
            call for a “national conference” of representatives from across the country, to be held in the east-
            ern Ukrainian city of Kharkiv. In response to that call, public assemblies were held in as many as
            43 cities or towns. Together they approved about 118 delegates (see MMIC 11.01.2014).
      49    See particularly MMIC (11.01.2014; 12.01.2014) and UkrN (12.01.2014).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014      139

At the same time, other statements suggest that the government continued to do a good
job for the country: the bilateral trade turnover and volumes of mutual investments
with CU were just about to increase (see GovUkr 15.01.2014j), the work of social patrols
and warm-up facilities during the cold weather was ensured (see GovUkr 16.02.2014f),
promising initiatives of industrial cooperation with Russia were started (see GovUkr
16.01.2014g) and even the annual program of cooperation between Ukraine and NATO
was approved (see GovUkr 16.01.2014a). Ultimately, regardless of the opposition’s block-
ing of (i.e. absence from) the parliament, the government’s majority adopted the 2014
budget by show of hands, without any opposition representative being present.

Phase IV (Jan 16 – Feb 22)

In the parliamentary session of January 16, in addition to the 2014 budget, the gov-
ernment majority adopted a legislative package commonly titled “anti-protest-laws”.50
From EuroMaidan’s perspective, apart from the dubious adoption procedure (no preced-
ing debate, opposition parties excluded, and adoption by simple show of hands without
systematic registration), those amendments implied an unprecedented limitation of
citizens’ freedoms and rights and thus corresponded to a permanent state of emergency
that was proclaimed “to disperse civil society and get rid of the civic protests across
Ukraine” (UkrN 16.01.2014). In detail, the legislative package involved:

•    libel as a criminal act, e.g. in the context of journalistic investigations collecting in-
     formation about law enforcement officers (punished by substantial fine up to impris-
     onment);
•    setting up tents or wearing helmets represents a violation of restrictions in context
     of mass demonstrations (punished by imprisonment of up to 15 days);
•    any unsanctioned movement of five or more vehicles (punished by revocation of
     driver’s license for up to two years and confiscation of the vehicle);
•    “extremism”, i.e. producing and circulating information claiming resignation of gov-
     ernment or change of constitution (punished by substantial fines or imprisonment
     up to 3 years);
•    unsanctioned rallies (punished by imprisonment from 10 to 15 years);
•    work of internet media not registered as “news agencies” (substantial fines and con-
     fiscation of media and equipment);
•    blocking of government buildings or private properties of high-level state functions
     (punished by imprisonment up to 6 years).

According to EuroMaidan activists, as the anti-protests laws came into force, the gov-
ernment not only suspended constitutional rights of Ukrainian citizens and gave itself a
mandate of arbitrary crackdown against the judiciary, the press, civil society organisa-
tions and citizens but also created an instrument to obscure its crimes of the preceding


50    Officially, the Draft Law No. 3879 included 10 amendments and is named “On making Amendments
      to the ‘Law of Ukraine on the Judiciary and the Status of Judges’” and on “Procedural Laws on Ad-
      ditional Measures for Protecting Security of Citizens”.
140   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      months. In this regard, the new laws stated that members of the Berkut special police
      unit, as police forces in general, could not be persecuted for the disproportionate use of
      force against journalists and protesters on Maidan.51
           Based on the analysis of media coverage in January 2014, EuroMaidan was por-
      trayed as an unprecedented protest movement that has survived despite all adverse
      circumstances, including severe winter conditions and persistent repression by the
      government. Regarding to this, media reports left no doubt that the anti-protest laws
      were widely interpreted as a serious attack on human rights leading Ukraine back into
      its undemocratic past:

           “The Party of Regions on Jan. 16 rammed through, without public notice or debate,
           a raft of draconian laws that drop any pretense of transforming Ukraine into a
           European-style democracy. […] Ukraine will regress back to the dark ages of author-
           itarianism, indistinguishable from most former Soviet republics where dictatorships
           flourish.” (KyivPost 17.01.2014: 4)

      Nevertheless, according to prominent EuroMaidan figures interviewed by the KyivPost
      (17.01.2014: 2), the protest movement did not let itself be intimidated by the many at-
      tempts of silencing and smashing. Quite the contrary, EuroMaidan spontaneously de-
      veloped new forms of protest and would continue to do so, as Viktor Kylymar, one of the
      student strike leaders of the National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy, stated:

           “We started marches to Mezhyhirya (Yanukovych’s house), we are going to organize
           the stopping of Yanukovych’s motorcade and we have been picketing government
           offices and businesses of representatives of Party of Regions.” (KyivPost 17.02.2014:
           2)

      Related to this, the media draw the attention to a form of protest that became increas-
      ingly important: boycotting businesses. Based on the idea of threatening various busi-

      51    Sources from civil society opposition meticulously substantiated their statements by comprehen-
            sive data: According to its statistic, from November 22 to January 13, 386 people were intimidated
            illegally, 222 people were physically attacked and 23 cars damaged. In detail, the reported “crimes”
            include: road police stopping buses driving to EuroMaidan in Kiev; mass systemic intimidation
            of activists via phones, SMS, media; intimidation of journalists (acquiring personal data, publish-
            ing to compromising data); turning off electricity; stealing equipment; violent dismissals of Euro-
            Maidan demonstrations by the police (in Mykolayiv, Cherkasy, Dnipropetrovsk, Chernivtsi, Odesa,
            Kiev); asking internet service provider to switch off services on government order; hacker attacks
            on media and NGO sites; intimidation of local governments; direct intimidation of participants of
            protests; direct intimidation of organizations that help the protests; hiring goons (“Titushki”) for
            violent actions against protesters; intimidation of opposition politicians (email hacked, phones
            monitored); intimidation of students who participate in protests (threats to dismiss from Univer-
            sities); banning the driving license for participants of automotive protests; systemic obstruction
            of First All-Ukraine Forum of Euromaidans (attacks on buildings, tear spray and pepper gas, noise
            grenades, loudspeakers used to mute the assembly, attacks of Titushki, turning off the electricity
            during the plenary session, beating of activists); Ministry of Culture threatens to ban Ukrainian
            Greek Catholic Church because of participation of clergy in protests (see MMIC 16.01.2014b; see
            also UkrN 17.01.2014).
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          141

ness groups with revenue losses, initiatives like “Economic Resistance”, a group of civic
activists, had already begun to draw up a well-researched list of businesses owned by
the president’s entourage in order to offer Ukrainians the possibility to influence poli-
tics by means of boycott; as it turned out, according to media reports, with considerable
success.52
     In an overall view, both the analysed media and INGO reports are suggesting that the
adoption of the anti-protest laws on January 16 represented another fatal turning point in
the history of the EuroMaidan protests. Yet, it was taken as demonstrated that the adop-
tion not only constitutes a “circumvention of the usual procedures” in parliament but
would also have a “devastating effect on freedom of expression, association, and assem-
bly” (AI 17.01.2014).53 In order to react to this situation, the analysed INGO statements
increasingly and openly claimed to impose EU-sanctions on the president, government
members and on further persons and companies in the ruling parties’ environment (e.g.
by blocking bank accounts; see e.g. UkrN 17.01.2014).
     From EuroMaidan’s perspective, the days after the adoption of the anti-protest laws
were characterised by rapidly increasing tension and confrontation. From EuroMaidan’s
perspective, the president personally accounted for this new wave of countrywide
protests against the government and, more precisely, against the new anti-protests laws
that led to a massive use of force between police forces (using batons, flash grenades,
teargas, water guns) and protesters (making use of stones, fireworks, batons, Molo-
tov cocktails while reinforcing the barricades). Driven by the dynamic of the events,
protesters on Maidan, referring to themselves as incarnation of the “Popular Assem-
bly”54 , even adopted resolutions on “the formation of alternative state institutions”,
including the parliament, the government, local police forces and new elections in Kiev
(see UkrN 20.01.2014a). However, while rumours about the redeployment of military
and police units (from other parts of the country to the capital) that had been blocked
by protesters spread (see MMIC 20.01.2014a), the “right sector” and other militant
protesters formed a civil defence militia and engaged in organised fights with the police.
In the course of this, police cars were torched, and rubber bullets were used.55
     Against the background of about 200 injuries on all sides up to that point and given
the stand-off on Maidan, political opposition parties declared to be willing to resume

52   In January, Economic Resistance’s boycott list included more than 200 companies (and the property
     schemes behind) (see KyivPost 17.01.2014: 6).
53   See also a statement from Reporters without Borders (“[…] the Law represents a decisive step back
     from democracy”; cited by MMIC 16.01.2014d), from the Centre of Policy and Legal Reforms (“All these
     laws were adopted in violation of principles of the rule of law”; CPLR 21.01.2014) or from the Inter-
     national Renaissance Foundation (“No lawyer in the country could give you a clear understanding of
     what these laws are about”; cited by MMIC 21.01.2014g).
54   In Ukraine, the People’s Assembly or, in Ukrainian, “Veche” traces back to medieval times, when in
     the federation of the “Kievian Rus” free citizens assembled to discuss question of public interest
     and to adopt legally binding resolutions.
55   In the light of the violence observed on Maidan, more and more self-critical voices from Euro-
     Maidan spoke up: “The stand-off seems to suit both sides: the regime is getting footage that it can
     use to justify an attack by riot police on the demonstrations while young protesters have an ideal
     outlet for their anger, and a means to prove their heroism. Lots of testosterone flowing tonight on
     the protesters’ side.” (MMIC 20.01.2014c)
142   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      the roundtable talks with the president on condition that the anti-protest law package
      would be withdrawn. According to government statements, “irresponsible politicians
      from Maidan” who instrumentalised the Russia-Ukraine-deal to inflame fears about a
      new Soviet Union had induced the current situation. Therefore, the afore-said politicians
      are not only accused of “cheating people with their demagoguery”, as Prime Minister
      Azarov stated, but also bear responsibility for those resorting to violence on Maidan
      (see GovUkr 20.01.2014a). In this context, particularly voices from the ruling Party of
      Regions advocated for a rigorous application of the “anti-protest laws”:

           “We can state for sure: The dramatic events have confirmed the actuality and the
           punctuality of the anti-extremist laws that were adopted by the Verkhovna Rada.
           Violence and aggression have to banned behind a reliable legal shield.” (Party of
           Regions, cited in UkrN 20.01.2014b)

           “Radical people resorted to illegal acts that required the response of law en-
           forcement agencies. These illegal actions occurred despite numerous calls for their
           cessation, including from some members of the opposition.” (GovUkr 21.01.2014b)

      Indeed, as protesters’ sources reported, the government even elaborated its methods of
      intimidation and repression by using modern technologies of cell phone tracking – a
      measure that again increased the determination of the protesters.56 Against this back-
      ground, the government’s plan to initiate a countrywide dialogue while all sides should
      renounce further violent scenarios and provocations was not taken as a serious plan to
      promote a peaceful settlement of the situation.
           On January 22–23, Maidan’s first lost lives were officially declared. Based on the anal-
      ysed EuroMaidan sources, between 5 and 7 activists died during battles with the po-
      lice, most of them were shooting victims. In addition, dozens of people were missing,
      among them also the leader of AutoMaidan (see MMIC 23.01.2014; UkrN 23.01.2014a). As
      INGO reports point out, based on the shootings, the use of live ammunition obviously
      no longer represented a taboo. In the light of these extreme acts of violence by security
      forces, Amnesty International, for example, observed an environment of “pervasive po-
      lice impunity in Ukraine” (AI 22.01.2014).
           Based on the analysed government statements, the responsibility for the escalation of
      the conflict was exclusively attributed to the protesters, as Prime Minister Azarov stated:

           “I officially declare victims, which unfortunately we already have, are on the con-
           science and the responsibility of the organizers and participants of mass unrests.
           I require that the law enforcement agencies thoroughly and vigorously investigate


      56    According to affected protesters on Maidan, the government was able to use provider informa-
            tion to pinpoint the locations of cell phones in use near clashes between riot police officers and
            protesters. Thereby, protesters received a text message saying, for example, “Dear subscriber, you
            are registered as a participant in a mass disturbance” (MMIC 21.01.2014e). Moreover, activists re-
            ported on the adoption of a “double strategy” of the authorities: Thus, in addition to the “usual”
            attacks by police forces on Maidan, individual participants were chased and hassled, e.g. by beat-
            ings, breakings, torchings of cars and buildings (see e.g. UkrN 23.01.2014a).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          143

     these crimes. […] Obviously, that some extremists by bitter irony are trying to rape
     all Ukraine, constitutional order and legality.” (GovUkr 22.01.2014a)

On top of that, while the political opposition announced the formation of a revolution-
ary government and an increasing number of Ukrainian towns obviously refused to ap-
ply the “anti-protest laws”, protesters were qualified as “cynical and amoral terrorists”
preparing a coup d’état (see GovUkr 23.01.2014e). However, despite rhetorical irreconcil-
ability and ongoing clashes in Maidan, government and EuroMaidan protesters agreed
on a temporary cease-fire in order to enable opposition leaders to attend a second round
of negociations with president Yanucovych, in which, according to the government, all
critical issues (European integration, democratic elections, anti-protest laws) would be
on the agenda.57
     In the analysed media coverage, the period after the adoption of the anti-protest
laws was represented unambiguously: When the protests on Maidan reached another
crescendo after the dubious adoption of the January 16 law package whose substance was
widely observed as undemocratic, violent repression by police forces increased dramat-
ically and deliberately. As the first deaths became known, this was identified as another
turning point:

     “Police atrocities awaken nation – As clashes between police and protesters intensi-
     fied since Jan. 19, including the deaths from gunshot wounds of at least two demon-
     strators, the nation has awakened to realize the brutality and ruthlessness of its po-
     lice force. Multiple images of tortured victims, pieces of ammunition and leaked pho-
     tographs and video evidence exposed mass atrocities.” (KyivPost 24.01.2014: 2)

Moreover, the media particularly focussed on the increasingly violent experiences of
journalists on Maidan. In this regard, the obvious finding was that journalists cov-
ering the protests were “under attack”. Since journalists received injuries from stun
grenades and rubber bullets, there was a strong suspicion that journalists were even
specifically targeted despite clear identification as members of media. Based on these
experiences, the main message of the media was to “call on security forces to respect the
rights of journalists to work in safety” and “to urge the government to repeal the laws,
which gave Ukraine some of the most repressive media legislation in Europe.” (KyivPost
24.01.2014: 3).
     In marked contrast to the government highlighting its unabated support in major
parts of the Ukrainian population58 , the analysed media suggested that the govern-
ment’s and the president’s position began to weaken: As public anger stoked after the
first roundtable sessions ended without any result, further public buildings throughout


57    On this, see both government and civil society opposition sources: GovUkr (23.01.2014f), MMIC
      (23.02.2014).
58    More precisely, the government repeatedly invoked the loyalty of its core clientele, as the following
      statement of Prime Minister Azarov illustrates: “Our conviction is based on the fact that south-
      east of Ukraine, where three fourth of GDP output is focused, didn’t yield to provocations and are
      working stably and support the policy of the President and the Government. We have on whom to
      rely.” (GovUkr 24.01.2014c)
144   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      the country were occupied59 and clashes between police forces and protesters on Kiev’s
      Maidan continued, including e.g. Berkut units storming into the spots marked with
      the Red Cross and hundreds of militant protesters throwing stones, stun grenades and
      Molotov cocktails at the police (see KyivPost 24.01.2014: 8–12). In sum, at this point, the
      media detected a dramatically increasing propensity towards violence on all sides both
      rhetorically and physically. In an atmosphere of swirling rumours about the imminent
      proclamation of martial law, protesters on Maidan began to systematically form self-
      defence units while more and more evidence about the use of life ammunition by the
      police became known.60
           In late January, based on the analysed statements and reports from all sides, the
      events followed in quick succession: On the one hand, further government buildings in
      Kiev were occupied (e.g. Ministry of Justice) or there were attempts to do so (e.g. Ministry
      of Energy and Coal Industry) (see GovUkr 27.01.2014a). Also, irregular state-sponsored
      goon squads (“Titushki”) systematically began to beat up protesters while regular police
      units started to seize injured protesters directly in hospital (see MMIC 25.01.2014b). On
      the other hand, the roundtable talks resulted in agreements on unblocking streets and
      government buildings, on granting amnesty for detained protesters and on the revo-
      cation the January 16 anti-protest laws in parliament. Ultimately, on January 28, even
      Mykola Azarov resigned from the position of Prime Minister, in order to defuse the sever-
      ity and danger the conflict represented for the country, as his last statement indicates:

           “The conflict situation which has arisen in the state is threatening economic and so-
           cial development, constitutes a threat for the whole Ukrainian society and every citi-
           zen in it. […] For the sake of a peaceful settlement of the conflict, I took my personal
           decision to ask the President of Ukraine to accept my resignation. […] The most im-
           portant today is to preserve the unity and integrity of Ukraine. That is much more
           important than anybody’s personal plans and ambitions.” (GovUkr 28.01.2014)

      Even tough Azarov’s successor, acting First Vice Prime Minister Serhiy Abuzov, imme-
      diately continued to send conciliatory and conversational signals (including e.g. a con-
      firmation of the amnesty for detained activists; see GovUkr 29.01.2014e), EuroMaidan’s
      sceptical voices still dominated its communication. Based on the statements from civil
      society opposition, protesters were still determined to stay on Maidan since they were

      59    According to the KyivPost (24.01.2014: 12), protesters took over gubernatorial buildings in Lviv,
            Ternopil, Cherkassy, Rivne, and Khmelnytsky. Attempts were also made on the regional councils of
            Sumy, Ivano-Frankivsk, Zhytomyr and Vinnytsia, where demonstrations took place. Furthermore,
            here and there police units were reported to have joined EuroMaidan activists.
      60    As the protests on Maidan took a deadly turn, statements from the US, Russia and the EU were fre-
            quently cited in civil society sources as well as in the media: While the Russian parliament blames
            extremists and Western politicians for escalating the conflict, the US started to impose sanctions
            against high level government officials. The EU, however, left it at diplomatic warnings and ad-
            journed the decision to impose sanctions to February 10, when the next meeting of the EU Council
            of Ministers of Foreign Affairs would take place – a fact that was commented critically: “World War
            III could have, perhaps, changed the old ossified order, but not the bloody events in Ukraine. Bu-
            reaucracy in Europe remains as stagnant as everywhere.” (The Ukrainian Week 30.01.2014: 20; see
            also MMIC 25.01.2014a)
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014            145

convinced that it was their responsibility to hold the government accountable. In this
view, Azarov’s resignation did not change much about the initial situation, which had
been marked by the civil society’s profound desire not just to change leading positions
but to change the whole system (see UkrN 29.01.2014a, b). Other statements thus portray
the situation as an atmosphere of unabated tension:

     “Tension is particularly high near the barricades where defenses are most compre-
     hensive, but also where police lines are in plain view of the demonstrators. Standing
     next to a burning barrel (temperatures have dropped to about -15 C during the day)
     listening to conversations between helmet-clad young men, it seemed that a single
     “spark” would be enough to rekindle violence. […] the regime changed its tune ex-
     ceptionally quickly. Whereas yesterday the entire country seemed to be preparing for
     a declaration of martial law, suddenly today, Azarov was fired and the “dictatorial”
     legislation passed on 16 January was rescinded.” (MMIC 29.01.2014a)

By releasing statements about the renewed rapprochement to the EU (on the occasion
of a meeting with a mission of the European Parliament; GovUkr 30.01.2014d) and
about other ‘ordinary’ official news (e.g. concerning Ukraine’s selected logo for the
Winter Olympics 2022 in Lviv; GovUkr 30.01.2014f), the government tried to convey an
impression of easing and going back to normal – with limited success, as media reports
suggest:

     “On The Brink Of Civil War – Civil war has been averted, for now. But what some
     are calling a revolution in the making – pitting anti-government protesters against
     a corrupt government that they say uses terror and state-sponsored attrition – is
     taking its toll. (KyivPost 31.01.2014: 1)

     “During these critical days, time in Kyiv is running out much faster than in Brussels.
     And if the EU fails to mobilize in the near future, this temporal gap will deepen
     even more. The problem on the table will not be just the murder of a democratic
     country, but the EU's own suicide.” (The Ukrainian Week 30.01.2014: 21)

In a nutshell, the analysed media reports characterise the situation as a highly tense and
volatile one. Thereby, the status quo, both referring to the capital61 and the country as

61    KyivPost’s “Visual Guide to EuroMaidan” (31.01.2014: 3; descriptions taken over from the article), an
      illustrated account on occupied public buildings, squares and streets in Kiev conveys the impres-
      sion of a “report from the frontline”: Ukrainian House Building (2 Khreshchatyk St.), one of the latest
      additions to buildings occupied, taken on Jan. 26, it hosts a medical aid unit, clothing donation
      point, overnight shelter and canteen; Institute of History of Ukraine building (4 Hrushevskoho St.),
      located at the firing line, has been used as a medical aid unit since the beginning of the clashes
      on Jan. 19; Trade Unions Building (2 Independence Square) was among the first buildings seized by
      protesters on Dec. 1, it promptly became EuroMaidan headquarters, hosting a press office, hostel,
      kitchen, meeting hall, a medical aid unit and self-defence headquarters; Ukrainian Parliamentary
      Library Building (1 Hrushevskoho St.) was handed over to protesters by its employees, it is used as
      a second medical aid unit for those fighting at the front lines; Zhovtnevy Palace (1 Instytutska St.)
      has been occupied by protesters since Dec. 1 and serves as official headquarters of EuroMaidan
      self-defence units and a medical aid unit, protesters say the building was taken over peacefully
146   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      whole is portrayed as a kind of ongoing state of siege (see map from KyivPost 31.01.2014:
      2 below) whereas the atmosphere was dominated by deep suspicion due to various am-
      biguous signals of the government: On January 29, the parliament passed an amnesty
      law, which stipulated that detained protesters would be released and freed from pros-
      ecution if EuroMaidan activists vacate occupied government buildings within 15 days.
      From the government’s perspective, the law on amnesty represented an “effective step
      towards a compromise” (see GovUkr 31.01.2014c). At the same time, hired thugs con-
      tinued to attack and terrorise protesters (see KyivPost 31.01.2014: 4). In the same con-
      tradictory way, the government announced that a “promising infrastructure project” of
      Ukraine and Russia on the construction of a transport crossing through the Kerch Strait62
      had been approved (see GovUkr 31.01.2014b). However, simultaneously, Russia restarted
      trade sanctions against Ukraine and put its bailout package on hold, a fact that remained
      unmentioned in government communication (see KyivPost 31.01.2014: 12).
           The analysed INGO reports of late January/ early February basically focused on three
      issues: First, the latest amnesty law is seen as an illegitimate strategic trick that puts “the
      Ukrainian state on a par with pirates and terrorists who use hostages as a tool to influ-
      ence the situation” since the destiny of citizens that had been arrested on an uncertain
      legal basis (i.e. detained protesters) was linked to the behaviour of other citizens that are
      accused of having committed different crimes (i.e. activists in occupied public buildings)
      (see UHHRU 31.01.2014). Second, the story of Dmytro Burlatov, the leader of AutoMaidan
      who vanished for 8 days without a trace, was extensively referred to as a textbook ex-
      ample of brutal state repression, as interviews and reports from Amnesty International
      illustrate:

           “Soaked in blood, covered in cuts and bruises and his clothes stained, he spoke of
           his ordeal, saying, ‘I was crucified. My hands were pierced. They cut my ear. They cut
           my face. There is no spot on my body that is not injured’.” (AI 31.01.2014; 3.02.2014)

      Third, INGO reports in this period deal with the topic of far-right and anti-Semitic fac-
      tions present on Maidan. Thereby, the statements openly disagree with an increasing
      number of accounts from the government and foreign (particularly Russian) media ac-
      cording to which there is a connection between an alleged increase in anti-Semitism and
      the Maidan protests (UHHRU 3.02.2014). As highlighted by the UHHRU, based on the
      data from systematic monitoring of xenophobia over many years, there was a consis-
      tently low level of anti-Semitic incidents in the context of EuroMaidan.63 Furthermore,


            and the staff are allowed inside; Kyiv City State Administration Building (36 Khreshchatyk St.) was
            the first one seized by demonstrators on Dec. 1 and their original headquarters, now the building
            is mostly used as a hostel and canteen for protesters, it also houses a medical aid unit and a press
            centre with a big screen where protesters watch the latest news, two psychologists are on duty on
            the second floor.
      62    The Kerch Strait connects the Black Sea in the south with the Sea of Azov in the north. The strait
            between Crimea in the west and the Russian Taman Peninsula in the east is 3 to15 kilometres wide.
      63    Indeed, as the UHHRU admits, there were radical nationalist groups who joined the protest move-
            ment. However, as compared to EuroMaidan’s majority, these groups were marginal and numeri-
            cally weak (see UHHRU 3.02.2014).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   147

the UHHRU tells evidence that there is a systematic propaganda campaign in progress
“aimed at discrediting the political opposition and participants of the civic protests by
spreading false information about a wave of extremism […] supposedly caused by Euro-
Maidan” (UHHRU 3.02.2014).64



Figure 9: “Status report of protests in Ukraine”




(KyivPost 31.01.2014: 2)


    In contrast to the debates mattering to EuroMaidan protesters, the media and IN-
GOs, the analysed government statements in early February state an easing of the situ-
ation and, at the same time, increasingly focus on the economic dimension of the crisis
in Ukraine:

     “There are no confrontations on the streets. There are peaceful protests without any
     restriction from the side of the power. In general, the degree of conflict has been re-
     ducing and the executive power has to support the process of stabilization. The Gov-
     ernment works to reduce the negative impact of the political situation on the econ-
     omy. Unfortunately, we could not completely avoid such effects (GovUkr 5.02.2014a)

Here, the statements particularly refer to the credit ratings of Ukraine on interna-
tional capital markets that are expected to deteriorate with every extra day of protests
on Maidan and thus with ongoing political instability. Nevertheless, against all odds,
the government announced good news as well, including the revocation of the re-
cent sanctions concerning customs clearance of goods imposed by Russia (see GovUkr


64    For this, see also UkrN (4.02.2014) and KyivPost (7.02.2014: 9).
148   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      6.02.2014a). In sum, as protesters released parts of the streets and the city hall, for the
      government the negotiation process with the opposition still represented a promising
      way of tackling the crisis, despite right-wing groups acting as spoilers here and there
      (see GovUkr 7.02.2014).
          Drawing on the topic of economic development, the analysed media reports present
      a clear interpretation of the situation: As the economic activity is hampered throughout
      the country and the national currency has lost nearly ten percent of its value since the be-
      ginning of the protests on November 21, the protracted crisis obviously began to harm the
      economy. According to media accounts, Russia took advantage of the situation and con-
      ditioned the continuation of its bailout package and the imposition of the trade sanctions
      on the formation of an even Kremlin-friendlier government (see KyivPost 7.02.2014: 1, 5).
      Indeed, relating to the Russian influence on Ukraine’s crisis, there is growing evidence
      that

          “[T]he Kremlin propaganda machine is working in tandem with President Viktor
          Yanucovych’s administration in discrediting and smearing EuroMaidan protesters.”
          (KyivPost 7.02.2014: 4)

      In this context, the government’s credibility reached a new low-point: As foreign min-
      ister Kozhara, for example, casted doubt on whether the kidnapping and torture story
      of the Automaidan leader Bulatov (see above) was true, this was considered as a cyni-
      cal provocation on EuroMaidan. Also, the government released statements according to
      which EuroMaidan harbours “a bunch of gun-toting revolutionaries bent on spreading
      violence and damage to property”, as the methods (e.g. “revolution” graffiti) and targets
      (to be found on EuroMaidan’s boycott list) would prove (see KyivPost 7.02.2014: 4). Yet,
      according to the media, evidence suggests that these incidences were state-sponsored
      measures to discredit EuroMaidan or, in other words, to spread “terror against its own
      people”.
          To hold against state propaganda, EuroMaidan professionalised its communication,
      as detailed media accounts on the “public relations department” of EuroMaidan out-
      line: Operating in the protester-occupied Trade Unions building (since January), Euro-
      Maidan’s volunteers press relations group, “Euromaidan PR”, not only released informa-
      tion about the protests and helped foreign media to connect to with people on the ground
      but also combatted

          “[…] messages filtered through the many government-controlled news organizations
          in Ukraine and Russia, and others disseminated by foreign media that have focused
          their attentions on the more radical side of the protest movement, spreading mes-
          sages that it is dominated by anti-Semitic, far-right groups.” (KyivPost 7.02.2014: 3)

      Though, against the background of polling data gathered in late January and early
      February, a slim majority of the Ukrainian population still supported protests against
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014        149

the government65 whereas only a quarter expressed hope for a political solution (see
KyivPost 7.02.2014: 5). From civil society opposition’s perspective, EuroMaidan voices
and the leaders of the political opposition parties had little new to say unless claiming
regime change (by early elections), constitutional change (by returning to the 2004
constitution) and an end to the persecution of activists (see MMIC 10.02.2014). In this
atmosphere, as the protests on Maidan intensified again but without any immediate
chance to implement concrete claims, EuroMaidan protesters increasingly articulated
a common feeling of having reached a crucial phase, as exemplarily illustrated in the
following statement:

     “With an economy that is spiraling out of control, and with political forces both in
     Parliament and on the street at an impasse, an ‘end-game’ of some sort must be
     coming. But personally, I have doubts that this end-game will be peaceful.” (MMIC
     10.02.2014)

The visit of the Council of Europe Commissioner for Human Rights, Nils Muiznieks,
to Ukraine (February 5 to 10) could not change this impression. On the contrary, since
the government portrayed the Commissioners statements as a support for its course66 ,
protesters on Maidan became even more determined in preparing themselves for the
“end game” (see e.g. MMIC 11.02.2014).
     On February 12, the first detained activists were released within the framework of the
new amnesty law.67 According to its statements, the government was convinced of hav-
ing kept its side of the bargain and, therefore, firmly claimed the immediate unblocking
of streets and government buildings. In effort to ease the confrontation, it also declared
to be willing and able to continue the negotiation process and to stabilise the political
and economic situation with the help of all means available (see GovUkr 12.02.2014a).
However, despite this rather positive tone, two crucial issues marked the beginning of a
new “escalation of tensions” (see GovUkr 12.02.2014e): First, while detained protesters
still had to wait for their release (until streets and building would be unblocked), po-
licemen and those responsible for violent police operations on Maidan were directly re-
habilitated. Second, EuroMaidan sources provided unmistakable evidence referring to
Berkut snipers deployed to Maidan to target protesters. As the analysed media show,
both observations are connected to once again increasing protests on Maidan, including
the construction of new barricades and the formation of new self-defence units among



65    In this context, voices from civil society opposition also underlined that EuroMaidan as a “mass
      movement of civil disobedience” enjoyed a qualitatively broad support in population and thus mir-
      rored the Ukrainian society concerning its political, cultural, or religious orientations (see UkrN
      11.02.2014a).
66    See GovUkr (11.02.2014c): “The Government shares the largest part of approaches to settlement of
      the political crisis in Ukraine contained in the [Commissioner’s] Conclusions.”
67    However, the ruling party’s majority still refused to appoint a parliamentary commission to inves-
      tigate the disproportionate use of force during the preceding months, despite there was an in-
      creasing number of accounts from different (social) media and INGO sources that presented well-
      founded evidence (see e.g. AI 11.02.2014).
150   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      the protesters.68 Following the basic tenor of the media, at this point, a large part of the
      protesters reached the peak of a process of radicalisation, as the following quotes illus-
      trate:

           “It’s true that Maidan is radicalizing, but the reason is that the authorities aren’t
           carrying out demands. Every day of delay means a more and more dangerous
           atmosphere on Maidan (Andriy Parubiy, leader of “Maidan Self-Defense”, KyivPost
           14.02.2014: 9).

           “I am preparing my people for a possible war. During wartime, the law enforcement
           system can hardly work. And this chaos is caused by Maidan.” (Evgeny Zhilin, leader
           of a pro-government protest faction, KyivPost 14.02.2014: 9).

      Indeed, as the analysed statements from EuroMaidan sources confirm, the climate for
      negotiations increasingly deteriorates. While opposition party leader refused the offer to
      participate in a new government and also declared that they definitely would not vacate
      Maidan, delegates of the second All-Ukrainian EuroMaidan Forum held in Odesa bluntly
      articulated the predominant attitude in civil society opposition as follows:

           “We consider these occupied buildings as areas free from the criminal dictatorship
           of Yanukovych. Our objective is to liberate all of Ukraine from this criminal regime.”
           (MMIC 16.02.2014)

      Other statements invoke an overdue awakening of the Ukrainian society, which has fi-
      nally, with the help of EuroMaidan, worked up the courage to face and fight the post-So-
      viet “terrorist” state power (see UkrN 16.02.2014). Furthermore, against the background
      of Russia’s renewed bailout aid for Ukraine (“cementing its influence”) and regarding an
      increasing readiness to use violence on the government’s side (e.g. concerning Ukraine’s
      interior ministers who reportedly proposed to use flamethrowers against protesters), the
      protests again experienced a spreading throughout the country, particularly in Russia-
      leaning eastern Ukraine (see MMIC 17.02.2014b; 18.02.2014b). At the same time, after
      the talks between the president and the opposition (involving Western diplomats) failed
      again, the events on February 18 unfolded rapidly, as observations from different civil
      society sources clearly illustrate69 :

      •    new wave of protests claiming resignation of the president and the government, new
           elections and return to 2004 constitution;
      •    opposition draft law on return to the 2004 Constitution refused by the ruling party
           majority in parliament, then call for blocking of parliament;
      •    intensification of violence on Maidan: throwing of stones and Molotov cocktails (on
           both sides), use of flash grenades by the police;


      68    In fact, at a mass rally on February 9 already, opposition party leaders had already called for a na-
            tionwide expansion of self-defence units, which would guard protesters in Kyiv and other cities.
            At this point, a large part of the protesters put the plan into practise (see KyivPost 14.02.2014: 9).
      69    See particularly MMIC (18.02.2014b, c) and UkrN (17.02.2014a, 17.02.2014b, 18.02.2014).
       Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   151

•   torching of Party of Regions headquarters, Trade Unions building
•   (again) occupation of public buildings (in order to establish medical care);
•   far-right faction calls for using firearms (in case of attempts to clear the buildings);
•   reports about Titushki using life ammunition, robbing houses and people in the
    streets as well as coordinating their activities with police;
•   ongoing violence against journalists;
•   call for a general mobilisation in western Ukraine;
•   lockdown of the capital (quasi ‘state of emergency’), blocking of all roads;
•   several police officers shot dead;
•   shutdown of Poroshenko’s TV channel;
•   security forces crackdown on Maidan;
•   burning barricades on Maidan;
•   some police units solidarising with protesters
•   about 25 people dead and 500 people heavily wounded by grenades, rubber, and live
    ammunition.

According to government statements, the “outburst of violence and lawlessness” turned
out to be a crossing of (red) lines by “radicals” and “extremists” from the opposition, who
have nothing in mind but seizing power, even “at the cost of people’s blood” (see GovUkr
18.02.2014b). Therefore, based on the government’s assessment of the events, security
forces had no choice but to restore law and order “by all means within the legislation”:

    “The so-called protesters have been attacking the public authorities’ buildings,
    committing arsons, causing grievous bodily harm to law enforcement officials,
    using firearms and urging upon other citizens to assist them. These illegal activities
    threaten the lives and safety of citizens of Ukraine and the constitutional order in
    the country.” (Acting Prime Minister Arbuzov, GovUkr 18.02.2014a)

    “There is chaos started in Kyiv. At this the opposition leaders appear producers
    of these crimes. […] We warn hot irresponsible heads of the opposition – the author-
    ities possess the forces capable to establish order.” (GovUkr 18.02.2014b)

After the president and the government expressed their condolences to those died in the
confrontation (protesters, law enforcement officers) the next day, the opposition once
again was declared responsible for the escalation, that not only led to the sacrifice of
human life and to the destruction of state and citizen’s property but also discredited
the country within the international community, foreign investors and trading partners
(see GovUkr 19.02.2014a, c). In view of the people shot dead, the government statements
highlight that security forces had not used firearms during the preceding “liquidation
of riots”. Vice versa, as corresponding evidence (i.e. used weapons left behind) could
be seized afterwards, the protesters had used firearms to attack law enforcement of-
ficers (see GovUkr 19.02.2014b). Consequently, the government started to adopt mea-
sures to prevent further theft of weapons, ammunition and other military equipment
by strengthening the protection of military facilities (see GovUkr 19.02.2014e). Never-
theless, since “the President of Ukraine has clearly stated that he considers negotiations
152   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      the most effective way of settling the conflict and restore social harmony”, the presi-
      dent and opposition leaders resumed negotiations and agreed on a ceasefire, includ-
      ing that protests on Maidan were permitted to continue in a peaceful way (see GovUkr
      19.02.2014f).
          At the same time, while different party offices and national intelligence service
      bases all over the country were torched, rumours about an intervention of the Ukrainian
      military in Kiev went around on Maidan.70 In fact, the national intelligence service
      indeed announced “anti-terrorist measures across the country” since Ukraine was seri-
      ously threatened by “extremists”.71 Relating to the expression of regret, the attribution
      of responsibility and the proposals to get out the deadlock, statements from Euro-
      Maidan sources at this point are mirroring government statements, as the following
      commentary exemplarily summarises:

           “There are no circumstances that can legitimise or justify such scenes. We extend our
           deepest condolences to the victims and their families. We condemn in the strongest
           terms the use of violence as a way to solve a political and institutional crisis. It is the
           political leadership of the country that has a responsibility to ensure the necessary
           protection of fundamental rights and freedoms. We call on all sides to immediately
           put an end to the violence and engage into a meaningful dialogue, responding to
           the democratic aspirations of the Ukrainian people.” (MMIC 19.02.2014b)

      Based on the analysed statements from civil society opposition of the next day (February
      20), the following topics were the most referred to: First, even though the situation was
      not (yet) seen as a civil war, it was expected that the conflict would further escalate into vi-
      olence due to miscalculation from both sides leading to an impasse. Second, despite cer-
      tain fatalism, the protesters called upon the EU and the US to impose political and eco-
      nomic sanctions on government members and the president (see MMIC 20.02.2014c).
      Third, the analysed documents suggest that the dissent between the (moderate) political
      opposition parties and EuroMaidan activists became more and more apparent. While the
      former still believes in a chance to compromise the latter expects a mounting bloodshed
      (“the regime will finish what it started”; see 20.02.2014b).72 Indeed, against the back-
      drop of snipers who continued to target protesters on Maidan and regarding the offi-
      cial firing order against “extremists” issued by the interior minister, the activists’ hope
      for a stable ceasefire agreement and for any other substantial agreement with the gov-
      ernment (e.g. concerning changing the constitution) faded quickly. Finally, voices from
      civil society opposition brought up their observations of increasingly obvious cracks in



      70    The government immediately denied information about the deployment of the military to dis-
            perse the protesters on Kiev (see GovUkr 19.02.2014e).
      71    This information took an even more agitating effect as the involvement of a Russian member of
            parliament who worked for the Russian national intelligence service in Kiev became known (see
            MMIC 19.02.2014a).
      72    In this context, statements also mention that the Greek Orthodox Church decided to withdraw
            confidence from the government due to the massive and disproportionate use of force against
            protesters.
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014        153

the regime: Therefore, the “doves faction” (particularly influential oligarchs) overtly criti-
cised the government and pled for de-escalating strategies. Beyond that, several MPs left
the parliamentary group of the ruling party and, together with the opposition parties’
MPs, voted for a termination of the countrywide “anti-terrorist operations” (see MMIC
20.02.2014b).
    In one of the last official statements, the president called for a truce and promised
to continue fair negotiations with opposition leaders. In parallel, the government made
another try to appease the population and thus declared “ministries and departments
are operating to ensure life support of the country in the complex political situation” (see
GovUkr 20.02.2014). At same time, however, reports about violence and chaos in many
parts of the country73 and about heavy clashes and a massive increase of the death toll on
Maidan spread like wildfire. On February 21, KyivPost headlined as follows:

     “Bloodlust – At least 75 killed in week of carnage – Ukraine spins out of control as
     death toll mounts. […] Ukraine’s Health Ministry said that at least 75 people had
     been confirmed dead as a result of clashes this week – 26 on Feb. 18–19 and at least
     49 on Feb. 20. […] Most of them were protesters. But at least 13 of these victims were
     police officers.” (KyivPost 21.02.2014: 1, 4)

According to the analysed media coverage, both sides immediately blamed each other
“for igniting the deadly conflict”: On the one hand, protesters armed with improvised
weapons, Molotov cocktails, stones and shields were accused of attacking police po-
sitions, torching police vehicles, firing at police with live ammunition and capturing
officers as “prisoners of war”. On the other hand, security forces were accused of using
improvised explosive devices packed with nails and of firing at unarmed protesters with
shotguns and automatic rifles. Furthermore, based on media accounts, as protesters
were shot in head, neck, heart or lungs, there was every indication that snipers deliber-
ately targeted protesters with great precision from ambush. Finally, based on volunteer
doctors’ experiences on Maidan, the police did not allow treating protesters immediately.
Other eyewitness reports cited in the media and INGO reports put it straight:

     “It felt like real war” (AI 21.01.2014)

     “Central Kyiv became a war zone just after breakfast time on Feb. 20, shatter-
     ing a truce reached the night before by embattled President Viktor Yanukovych
     and opposition leaders. Either police and protesters weren’t listening, or they had
     different orders. It remained unclear late on Feb. 20 who drew first blood on the
     country’s bloodiest day in its post-Soviet history.” (KyivPost 21.02.2014: 3)

Though, as further media reports suggested, the breakup of the authorities accel-
erated: Although the president and opposition party leaders agreed on an ultimate




73    According to statements of the national intelligence service, “insurgents” looted military arms de-
      pots throughout the country.
154   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      compromise74 , the parliament unilaterally passed resolutions on the return to the 2004
      constitution, on the unconditional amnesty of all detained protesters and on the dis-
      missal of interior minister Zakharchenko. Finally, on February 22, after Yanucovych
      had been ousted from office by another parliamentary resolution, all armed groups on
      Maidan and in Ukraine as a whole agreed to lay down arms.



      5.3 The Temporality of Maidan

           “The temporal dimension is constituted by the fact that the difference between be-
           fore and after, which can be experienced in all events, […] is extended into the past
           and the future.” (Luhmann 1995: 77–78)


      Communication about the Maidan protests includes specific delineations and charac-
      terisations of the present. Thereby, the present or, more precisely, the experiencing of
      the present from different observing perspectives is structured and ordered according
      to varying differentiations of before and after. This chapter highlights the central tags of
      Maidan’s temporal dimension based on the text corpus. The following sections show the
      development of communication in a temporal dimension with a view to three conflict
      phases and, in addition, on the basis of three separate presentations of sources group
      coding. In doing so, it becomes evident how certain aspects of the past are actualised at
      a given moment of the conflict’s present and, accordingly, how plans and ideas about the
      future are condensed in the here and now of the conflict.
          In phase I, right from the beginning on November 21, the Maidan protests were
      associated with the “Orange Revolution” of 2004, since they started on the eve of its
      ninth anniversary.75 As mentioned earlier, the media straightaway offered comparisons
      of both “revolutions”, saying things that EuroMaidan (with at least 100.000 protesters on
      November 24) represents “the largest public demonstration since the Orange Revolution”
      (Kyiv Post 29.11.2013: 1). In this context, the media as well as civil society statements left
      no doubt about the “orange” and thus revolutionary character of EuroMaidan which
      was described as a country-wide mass movement that included the whole society in its
      aspiration to continue the path of European integration. Thereby, the Orange Revolution
      was not only referred to as a simple historical benchmark to illustrate the size and the
      quality of the protest activities. Rather, EuroMaidan was interpreted as a follow-up of



      74    This compromise was mediated by high rank diplomats form Germany, Poland and France and
            included the immediate return to the constitution of 2004 and prompt new elections.
      75    On November 22, 2004, the so-called “Orange Revolution” began. In the collective memory
            of Ukrainians, the Orange Revolution, initiated by supporters of presidential candidate Viktor
            Yushchenko who were wearing orange as a party symbol, stands for a national strike and a se-
            ries of mass demonstrations that emerged after the presidential elections were observed as being
            influenced by voter intimidation and electoral fraud on both sides. The bloodless Orange Revolu-
            tion lasted for more than two months. In the end, the protesters achieved a revote ordered by the
            Supreme Court of Ukraine, in which Viktor Yanukovych was declared the winner (see e.g. Kappeler
            2014).
       Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   155

the Orange Revolution, thus suggesting that both protest movements are interconnected
phenomena:

   “For many people, this decision not only represents the end of Ukraine’s European
   aspirations. It is also highly symbolic: Nine years ago, to the day, on November 22,
   2004, Ukrainians gathered on Maidan in Kiev, which became the venue of the Orange
   Revolution, to fight for justice. On this square, Ukrainians made their European his-
   tory. Today again, they are there to fight for their European future.” (UkrN 24.11.2013)

   “We cannot leave it that way, because we lost the victory in 2004.” (Statement
   of a protester on Maidan, interviews by KyivPost 29.11.2013: 5)

However, in the week before the third Eastern Partnership summit in Vilnius (28–29
November), the revolutionary impetus remained limited to the idea that the Ukrainian
government could still decide to sign the Association Agreement with the EU in Vil-
nius – supposing that EuroMaidan’s pressure on the streets remains high or increases
even more.
     Although some statements point to the fact that the government tried to renounce
any interpretation of the suspension of the Association Agreement as “historical”, later,
it picked up the topic under the impression of the EuroMaidan movement that became
increasingly popular:

   “I have not seen any tragedy, absolutely, and there is no ‘historicity’ in this moment
   if we come back to this issue in six months.” (Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, GovUkr
   23.11.2013c)

   “I’m sure this is a historic moment for our country. No one promised that it would
   be easy, nobody imagined that it will pass imperceptibly. So today we are going to
   discuss the issue, which has allowed finding a way out.” (First Vice Prime Minister
   Serhiy Arbuzov, GovUkr 28.11.2013c)

Other “historical” references that were associated with the claims of EuroMaidan in the
days before Vilnius include the idea of understanding the situation between the EU and
Ukraine (i.e. the status quo without signing the AA) as one of two entities actually belong-
ing together but separated by “a second Berlin Wall” that should (and could) be teared
down (see UkrN 24.11.2013). In this sense, Ukraine is once again presented as a truly Eu-
ropean country that started on its way to peacefully overcome an unjust border between
Ukraine and Europe, understood as a residue of the “Iron Curtain” in present time.
    To sum up, whereas the government’s pointedly unemotional account of the present
(“no historicity in this moment”, GovUkr 23.11.2013c) is shaped by economically deter-
mined plans and expectations about the near future,

   “In the negotiations with the EU or Customs Union Ukraine is guided exceptionally
   by the interests of citizens and have a pragmatic approach. […] And now we have no
   right to take hasty decisions that conflict with the interests of the national economics
   or industry. […] in negotiations with these trade and economic blocks everyone had
156   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

           realized that Ukraine would protect its producers. […] We will become a strong part-
           ner, it is an issue to be solved in the near future. (GovUkr 25.11.2013e)

      communication in the context of EuroMaidan merges historically charged ideas about a
      necessary sequel of the Orange Revolution and the overcoming of Europe’s ongoing polit-
      ical, economical and social division (“second Berlin Wall”) into the idea of an exceptional
      window of opportunity that sould be used to politically “fight for a European future”
      (UkrN 24.11.2013). Yet, when it became known that the government definitely did not
      sign the Association Agreement at the summit of Vilnius and, one day later (on Novem-
      ber 30), police units tried to dissolve EuroMaidan by using extensive physical force for
      the first time, the here and now of the conflict for all observers changed dramatically.

      Ukrainian authorities: “No historicity in this moment”

      According to the analysed text corpus, all observers frequently hinted at the Orange Revo-
      lution as a historical example that is in some way or other linked to the Maidan protests.
      However, contrary to the positive meaning attributed in documents from civil society
      opposition, official statements refer to the Orange Revolution as a rather dark chapter
      in recent Ukrainian history that should not serve as a model for the current situation. At
      this point, the government’s key message is to prevent the scenario of 2004 by all means
      since those “revolutionary events” led to massive economic turbulences, such as price in-
      creases and a weakening of the currency. And after all, Ukraine in 2013 is believed to be a
      “completely different country” than in 2004, i.e. a more European one where such meth-
      ods have been overcome (see e.g. GovUkr 3.12.2013e, f). While after the first violent crack-
      down the protests increased in size, the government’s negative comments on the ongo-
      ing comparisons of the Maidan protests with the Orange Revolution even heated up in
      phase II:

           “For ten years, this is the third attempt to seize power illegally. First attempt is the
           orange Maidan, the second – the illegal dissolution of the parliament. Today we have
           the third attempt. And every time a violation of the Constitution and the law led to
           serious consequences for Ukraine. It rejected us on the path of development. Do you
           want it? The people of Ukraine do not want it! I firmly declare that the Government
           will not allow such catastrophic scenarios!” (GovUkr 4.12.2013a)76

      Nonetheless, in contrast to its negative representation of the Orange Revolution in the
      past, the government signals an intention to draft a positive scenario of the future. While
      reminding all political forces in Ukraine of their responsibility for a peaceful develop-
      ment and for shaping the “fate of the nation”, the government makes an effort to de-


      76    Based on the government’s assessment here, there was a second attempt “to seize power illegally“.
            This hint refers to the dissolution of the parliament in April 2007, when former president Vik-
            tor Yushchenko (one of the leaders during the Orange Revolution) dissolved the democratically
            elected parliament, which was dominated by the Party of Regions (due to number of MPs who had
            changed over to the other camp right after the elections and thus unexpectedly created a majority
            that was able to change the constitution).
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   157

scribe a “third way” for Ukraine’s future. On the one hand, it repeatedly confirms the
way towards European integration. On the other hand, the government’s official com-
munication points to the imperative of concluding a “new strategic partnership” with
the Russian Federation (see e.g. GovUkr 4.12.2013d; 7.12.2013c). In this regard, the new
initiatives of approaching Russia are rhetorically linked to a critique of EuroMaidan that,
in this view, revitalises a negative aspect of the Russian legacy in Ukraine: EuroMaidan is
accused of invoking the ghosts of the past by favouring the unbounded rule of the people
in a revived form of Soviet councils that are both ineffective and not representative for
the whole population:

    “With all sincere respect for the people who peacefully express their position on
    Maidan, you cannot realize that they are not the whole Ukraine. The axiom is that
    the meetings cannot run the state. When the Bolsheviks had used this method of
    management in the last century, it, as known, finished poorly.” (GovUkr 11.12.2013a)

Thus, by distancing itself from EuroMaidan’s dubious experiments with ambiguous end-
ing, the government presents itself as being the only force able to act and to offer concrete
ways out of the politically volatile and economically precarious situation. In this sense,
the “Russia-Ukraine-deal” is presented as a future-oriented achievement:

    “Yesterday a truly historical event took place: in the course of the negotiations the
    Presidents of Ukraine and the Russian Federation managed to reach extremely sig-
    nificant arrangements […] that open good prospects for Ukraine for the following
    years and give an opportunity for the Government to approve today a budget of so-
    cial, I emphasize, and economic development of the country, being impossible by
    this time.” (GovUkr 18.12.2013a)

In Phase III, the government’s account of the Maidan protests was no longer only char-
acterised by (economically) justifying the suspension of the AA process but also by pub-
licly backing up its decision to conclude a number new cooperation projects and strategic
partnerships with Russia. In its end-of-year reviews, the government thus defended its
decisions and plans as measures to regain the stability and unity of the country:

    “Restoration of full partnership with Russia averted the worst scenario for our
    economy. […] Now there is no doubt in financial stability of Ukraine. […] Today
    more than ever we need to feel that we are a single nation, single state. We have a
    common goal – we want to live in an independent and prosperous country.” (GovUkr
    31.12.2013a)

As far as further future plans are concerned, the analysed government statements at the
turn of the year are limited to the announcement of long-term plans and measures, e.g.
concerning the “the radical modernization” of the economy or measures to develop the
infrastructure. At the same time, concrete propositions to surmount the perceived dan-
ger of “sinking in a political infighting” in 2014 are rather rare (see GovUkr 9.02.2014a).
    In sum, phases III and IV are marked by a certain defensiveness and inaptitude to re-
act to the events (apart from blaming civil society opposition for the situation) in terms
158   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      of a coherent policy. Instead, the statements convey the impression that the government
      is caught in the short-term nature of the crisis. For instance, while violence reached an
      unprecedented level and the first lives were lost on Maidan, government communica-
      tion, seemingly unimpressed, addressed ameliorating economic data and the success-
      ful reconditioning of energy supply during the severe winter season. Beyond that, some
      statements involve comments on highly symbolic historical dates that formed a marked
      contrast to the actual situation. Referring to the Day of Unification and Freedom on Jan-
      uary 22, for example, which, in normal circumstances, is meant to celebrate Ukraine’s
      short-lived pre-Soviet independence77 , the authorities confirm their determined inten-
      tion to fight anarchy, chaos and the danger of division caused by the protests on Maidan
      (see GovUkr 22.01.2014a). In the same vein, in the very last episode of the conflict, when
      rumours about a possible suppression of EuroMaidan with the assistance of the military
      persisted among the protesters, the government marks the day of commemoration of
      participants of war and honours the courage and “real patriotism” of Ukraine’s former
      USSR troops (see GovUkr 15.02.2014).

      Civil Society Opposition: “Everything is interconnected”

      According to the analysed documents from different sources that are attributed to civil
      society opposition, references to the Orange Revolution run like a golden thread through
      the statements. From phase II on, however, beyond the mere observation that Euro-
      Maidan represents the largest demonstration since the Orange Revolution mobilising
      millions of citizens in the whole country, the comparison between the two increasingly
      gets integrated into a comprehensive narrative that describes EuroMaidan as a logically
      necessary episode in Ukrainian history.
           In an obvious effort to expose its self-attributed historical meaning, EuroMaidan is
      thus portrayed as the chance of a lifetime to break with the Soviet and post-Soviet past,
      which is characterised by a “cycle of fierce competition and revenge politics” or, gener-
      ally speaking, by a winner-takes-it-all-thinking that produced “tough and determined
      political street fighters” (like president Yanuvovych) and therefore seriously harmed the
      Ukrainian society already torn between east and west (see e.g. MMIC 4.12.2013b). When
      a group of Maidan protesters destroyed the statue of Lenin at the top of Shevchenko
      Boulevard in Kiev on December 8, this historical burden again forged ahead in the here
      and now of the conflict on Maidan.78 Another highly symbolic association that was in the
      ‘revolutionary air’ of phase II referred to a well-known episode in European history:

           “Let us remember the student movement of 1968. Were there any concrete immedi-
           ate economic and political consequences? According to historians, there were rather
           failures. Only today, we understand the true value of those events: the world was no

      77    On January 22, 1919, the two predecessors of the modern Ukrainian state (Ukrainian People’s Re-
            public and West Ukrainian People’s Republic) adopted an agreement of unification, the “Act Zluky”
            (unification act), in Kiev (see Kappeler 2014: 165–187).
      78    See e.g. MMIC (9.12.2013). Further comments say that the dismantling of the granite statue of Lenin
            by the protesters also recalled the scene of “the symbolic fall of Saddam’s statue in Baghdad in
            2003” (see MMIC 24.12.2013a).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014         159

     longer as it was before. A few students from Sorbonne changed reality. Repression
     continued, but authorities fell apart. One could breathe more freely. In this atmo-
     sphere, a new kind of people emerged.” (UkrN 9.12.2013)

Based on the profound social transformation of European societies from 1968 on, Eu-
roMaidan activists in the same vein claim to do away with the “paralysing post-Soviet
shadow” and to mentally free the Ukrainian society (and, as a model, other post-Soviet
societies) from paternalistic structures. Thereby, EuroMaidan is depicted as one event in
a chain of events triggered by the Velvet Revolution in 198979 , beginning with Ukraine’s
struggle for independence in 1990/1991, continuing with the Orange Revolution in 2004
and now, with EuroMaidan, completing the “civilising breakthrough from Eurasia to Eu-
rope” (UkrN 12.12.2013).80 In this context, from the perspective of those activists who wit-
nessed both the Orange Revolution and EuroMaidan, the latter is characterised as less
party political, more relaxed and open-minded. Yet, the atmosphere was described as
carnivalesque and as a kind of artistical happening. At the same time, against the back-
ground of a less consolidated political system and a more fragmented government in
2004, the Orange Revolution was outlined as being more party politically dominated and
thus planned in a more professional and long-term way (see UkrN 12.12.2013).
    As the Russia-Ukraine-deal was concluded (phase III), the opponents of a rapproche-
ment with Russia on Maidan tightened the tone by referring to the historical origins of
the “unnaturally divided Ukrainian society”:

     “East Ukraine was once as nationalistic and Ukrainian-speaking as Western Ukraine
     is today. The dramatic transformation of the area was a result of ethnic cleansing.
     In 1932, a famine engineered by Stalin killed up to an estimated 10 million people,
     mostly in East Ukraine. Beginning in 1933, the Soviets replaced them with millions
     of deported Russians.” (MMIC 17.12.2013e)

As 2013 was the 80th commemoration of the Ukrainian “Holodomor” (i.e. “genocide by
hunger”) and part of the Ukrainian political elite and particularly Russian authorities
still refused to term the events of 1932/1933 a “genocide” and “ethnic cleansing”, voices
from EuroMaidan picked up the issue to state that EuroMaidan also represents a sym-
bol against Russia’s great power politics and thus marks “the frontline of liberal democ-


79    This hint to the beginning of the breakdown of the “Eastern bloc” in what was then Czechoslovakia
      is supplemented by references to the Hungarian crisis in 1956 in other commentaries: “In October
      in Budapest, as in Kiev, there were peaceful protests and demonstrations against the harshness
      and severity of the Russian-controlled government. The Hungarian people wanted to turn toward
      the West, but their government, like the Ukraine, at Moscow’s urging, turned loose the police to
      forcibly end the demonstrations. By the beginning of November, it was clear that Moscow would
      do whatever it took to make certain that Hungary remained within their sphere. When the Hun-
      garian police couldn’t achieve that result, Russian tanks and troops were sent to do the job.” (MMIC
      22.12.2012)
80    Other accounts point out that EuroMaidan is also reminiscent of the events in 2000/2001 when
      under the slogan “Ukraine without Kuchma” thousands of Ukrainians protested for the resignation
      of then president Leonid Kuchma who was accused of having ordered repressive measures against
      journalists (see e.g. UkrN 26.12.2013; MMIC 4.01.2014a).
160   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      racy”.81 In this context of a perceived cold-war-like competitive relationship between
      the West and Russia, a “civil war or an official breakup of the country” is seen as a “very
      real possibility” (see MMIC 17.12.2013e; 18.12.2013b).82 To complete these far-reaching
      warnings, the Maidan protests were sporadically dubbed “Ukraine’s version of the Arab
      Spring”. However, as the respective statements clarify, unlike the “unfortunate counter-
      parts in the Arab world”, the people of Euromaidan, at this point, are believed to have a
      “decent chance” of inducing real change, not only concerning the political elite but also
      the political system and society as a whole (see e.g. MMIC 16.12.2013b; UkrN 6.02.2014c).
      Here, once again, the Orange Revolution is portrayed as an earlier chapter of the same
      future-oriented story:

           “What we saw in the Orange Revolution, and what we are seeing now, is a fight for
           the very soul of Ukraine. […] At issue were not really the minutiae of a trade deal
           and matters of political and economic reform but something far more profound. The
           question is whether Ukraine will end years of balancing between the EU and Russia
           and definitively throw in its lot with the countries to its west, or whether it will re-
           turn to a Moscow-led order, in which it resumes its traditional role of Russia’s little
           brother.” (MMIC 24.12.2013a)

      As the “anti-protest laws” were adopted (phase IV), statements from civil society opposi-
      tion show an emerging disillusionment given the ambitious claims of EuroMaidan. Since
      Ukraine’s independence, there had never been a bigger step backwards concerning the
      rights and freedoms of Ukrainian citizens:

           “This is a devolvement of absolute power to the president and his henchmen and
           thus no less than a relapse into the times before 1989. [This is] dictatorship, totali-
           tarianism, and an open declaration of war.” (UkrN 17.01.2014)

      In this context, several reports retrospectively deal with the development of Ukraine
      since its independence and try to explain how it could come to this. Thereby, the situation
      is explained by referring to an overall inability to transcend the Soviet legacy: lack of ex-
      perience in democratic processes, a languishing Soviet-style economy, a Soviet-formed
      elite that persistently dominates the political elite as well as bureaucracies, and, all in all,
      favourable conditions for a small group of oligarchs to enrich themselves at the expense
      of the state and the Ukrainian people (see e.g. MMIC 21.01.2014a). Consequently, for
      those political leaders, the main objective is to stay in power by all available means:




      81    In a detailed article published by MMIC (21.12.2013c), the Ukrainian history from the 17th century
            on to the present is represented as a history “on the edge of empires” characterised by various
            divisions of the state territory and changing external rule. Ultimately, the article suggests that,
            due to EuroMaidan, there is finally a chance to overcome this virtual determinism of history.
      82    To counter this atmosphere and to promote the unity of the Ukrainian people, as some statements
            indicate, EuroMaidan activists deliberately reanimated slogans of the Orange Revolution: ‘East and
            West together!’ or ‘Away with the bandits!’ (see UkrN 22.01.2014).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014       161

     “In 2004, Yanucovych spoke a sacramental dictum: ‘Once in power, nobody will be
     able to oust us!’ On this maxim, from 2010 on, they began to establish a completely
     authoritarian regime – seemingly democratic for the West, but de facto dictatorial
     for the Ukrainian people.” (UkrN 25.01.2014c)

Based on that, the articulated expectations about the near future at this point definitely
implied that it would only be a matter of time before the authorities fall. Indeed, in its
post-Soviet history, the Ukrainian society slowly but surely developed a moderate mode
of political conflict settlement, drawing on peaceful mass protests and civil disobedi-
ence.83 However, against the background of systematic repression and excessive violence
against EuroMaidan protesters, the previously still existing optimistic hopes for a peace-
ful way of regime change were ultimately challenged, especially when the protests turned
deadly during its last days.84

The Media and INGOs: Reporting on the unprecedented

The observation of EuroMaidan within the framework of the analysed media coverage
and INGO reports includes various short-term foci. Here, too, the obvious superordinate
comparison to the Orange Revolution and other key events in Ukrainian history played a
central role.
    After the first violent crackdown on Maidan protests (phase II), media reports fre-
quently used interviews with “experts” and “affected people” to capture the complex sit-
uation:

     “Police has never attacked peaceful demonstrators at such a large scale with so many
     people hospitalized. […] There were fights between protesters in 2001, during the
     Ukraine ‘Without Kuchma protests’, but not one-sided attacks like this morning on
     such a big scale.” (Interview with “human rights activist” Yevhen Zakharov, KyivPost
     6.12.2013: 8)

     “‘What happened (on Nov. 30), it was bloody and unprovoked,’ says Oleh Ry-
     bachuk, one of the most visible members of civil society on EuroMaidan, referring
     to the violent police breakup of peaceful protesters that night which sent dozens of
     people to the hospital.” (KyivPost 13.12.2013: 14)

To pin down the events within a broader scope, the media also tried to explain the on-
going situation with reference to Ukraine’s history since its independence. In this con-
text, even though the share of supporters of “Ukraine’s European vector” was higher than
ever before (particularly in comparison to the Orange Revolution; see e.g. ICG 2.01.2014),


83    According to the analysed sources, against all adverse conditions, Ukrainian civil society as such
      indeed developed in a positive way since its independence, because there are manifold confident
      and independent political parties and non-governmental organisations with pro-European mind-
      sets. Therefore, a development towards a Belarussian-style autocracy is presented as implausible
      (see e.g. UkrN 25.01.2014a, 6.02.2014c).
84    See MMIC (21.01.2014d) and UkrN (24.01.2014b, c; 13.02.2014; 16.02.2014; 18.02.2014).
162   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      Ukraine’s political, economic and cultural independence from Russia was still seen as un-
      fulfilled. In this sense, ‘Ukraine without Kuchma’ in 2000/2001 and the Orange Revolu-
      tion in 2004 were represented as “missed chances” since none of the political forces really
      took the opportunity to break with the past and to bring about true societal change (see
      The Ukrainian Week 3.12.2013: 8–10). Thus, the “lost years” under Yanucovych only rep-
      resent the latest (albeit the worst) episode of a long record of growing cronyism and in-
      creasingly undermined democratic mechanisms fostered by parties of all colours (see The
      Ukrainian Week 3.12.2013: 6–7). Against this background, media coverage particularly
      emphasises one of the main differences between EuroMaidan and other mass protests in
      recent Ukrainian history: Right from the beginning, EuroMaidan deliberately decoupled
      from political parties and their symbols and thus presented itself as a new and unspoiled
      political force in Ukrainian society (see e.g. KyivPost 6.12.2013: 3).
          As the protests on Maidan mounted when the details about the government’s
      “Russia-Ukraine-deal” came to light in little slices, Media accounts more and more often
      address a certain heroic cult that developed around EuroMaidan:

          “Heroes are born during momentous times and EuroMaidan is no exception. Some of
          the heroic deeds inspired the whole nation, while other simply kept their compan-
          ions warm with a cup of coffee and a chat. There is already a book and a documentary
          in the works about outstanding EuroMaidan personalities.” (KyivPost 20.12.2013: 1)

      Reports emerging from this context include personal stories that draw on highly sym-
      bolic historical elements. For instance, KyivPost reported about “the bell-ringer” of St.
      Michael’s Cathedral, Ivan Sydor, who started to ring the bells of St. Michael’s to alarm
      the sleeping city and call for help when riot police started to attack protesters camps on
      Maidan in the night of December 11. Pointing out the singularity of this measure, the bell
      ringer stated:

          “The last time St. Michael’s sounded an alarm was in 1240, when Kyiv was under
          seizure from the Mongols. It was also a December, and the Mongols came to the
          Lyadski Gates, located in the place of modern Independence Square.” (KyivPost
          20.12.2013: 10)

      Further examples include “the old man”, Oleksiy Kushnirchuk, a highly motivated
      protester at the age of 85, whose sister had been killed by security officers in Soviet times
      and who wants to show his anger about the government’s plans to approach the CU,
      which he perceives as “a new Soviet Union” (KyivPost 20.12.2013: 10).
         As the Russia-Ukraine-deal was concluded and the protests on Maidan gained in size
      and quality (phase III), media reports more and more openly and frequently speculated
      about the prospects of the “Yanucovych regime”. Thereby, different future scenarios are
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           163

simulated with reference to the experiences of the past85 , particularly concerning the
electoral fraud in 2004 that induced the Orange Revolution:

     “If the EuroMaidan is neutralized and assistance is provided by Vladimir Putin, Viktor
     Yanukovych will prepare a wide range of tools to stay in power. […] So the upcom-
     ing presidential campaign [for the 2015 elections] may differ from that of 2004 in
     the following aspects: those in power may change the election law and amend the
     Constitution, dilute the votes of the opposition electorate, and bribe voters with ‘fat
     Russian cash’.” (The Ukrainian Week 23.12.2013: 10)

Even in mid-January 2014, when the protests on Maidan again achieved an unprece-
dented level in the light of the adoption of the “anti-protest laws”, those future scenar-
ios still see a realistic chance for Yanucovych “to win an honest election next year” since
the political opposition is presented as being too fragmented to pose a serious danger in
presidential elections (see e.g. KyivPost 17.02.2014: 4).
     In sum, media coverage in phase IV is marked by the contrast between ongoing ini-
tiatives of crisis talks (president, opposition leaders) and dramatically increasing tension
and confrontation. On January 22, media articles particularly refer to Ukraine’s Unity
Day, which turned out to be a day of civil unrest and a part of “the biggest test of Ukraine’s
post-Soviet integrity” (see The Ukrainian Week 30.01.2014: 10). On January 24, given the
first deaths on Maidan, the KyivPost cites one of the prominent rallying cries among
protesters on its cover page: “Give me liberty or give me death!”86
     Furthermore, in a both rhetorically and actually violent atmosphere, Yanucovych is
talked up as a head of state that is primarily motivated by revenge, despite all initiatives
for starting a dialogue with the broader opposition:

     “Actually, Yanukovych is seeking violence as a way of pay back, revenge for his 2004
     failure. He will keep talking about dialogue, but there are no democratic institutions
     for a dialogue in Ukraine as he usurped power back in 2010. What he is looking for
     is not compromise, but a way to excuse the use of state violence for his personal
     trauma.” (The Ukrainian Week 30.01.2014: 14)

In the same vein, the media reported on “special contributions” to EuroMaidan, such as a
widely shared video of protest scenes produced by activists and accompanied by Charlie
Chaplin’s final speech in The Great Dictator (1940) and therefore insinuating that Yanu-
covych’s regime, at least since the first lives were lost, could be equated with an inhuman
dictatorship:




85    In this regard, INGO accounts invoke exemplary scenarios such as the storming of the Winter
      Palace in the context of the October Revolution of 1917 or the revolutionary events on Tahrir Square
      in Egypt in 2011. However, most of these historically inspired scenarios were overruled since the
      general framework is seen as completely different (see UHHRU 27.12.2013).
86    The KyivPost (24.01.2014: 1) itself recalls that this dictum traces back to Patrick Henry (1736–1799),
      a prominent figure of the American War of Independence and Governor of Virginia.
164   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

           “Don’t give yourselves to these unnatural men – machine men with machine minds
           and machine hearts! You are not machines! You are not cattle! You are men! You
           have a love of humanity in your hearts! You don’t hate! Only the unloved hate, the
           unloved and the unnatural. Soldiers! Don’t fight for slavery! Fight for liberty!” (Charly
           Chaplin in The Great Dictator, cited in KyivPost 7.02.2014: 5)87

      As the protests turned increasingly violent and deadly, media articles more and more
      frequently used the metaphor of a closing window of opportunity. Thereby, under the
      pressure of events that followed in quick succession, external actors (particularly the EU
      and European countries) were called on to immediately intervene and prevent “the mur-
      der of a democratic country” which would also be “EU’s own suicide” (see The Ukrainian
      Week 30.01.2014: 21). Yet, this request remained disregarded. Instead, the “scenario of
      threatening bloodshed and a new ruin” approached.88 Right before the breakup of the
      government and Yanucovych’s fleeing from Ukraine, media reports ultimately stated that
      February 20 represented the bloodiest day in Ukraine’s post-Soviet history (see e.g. Kyiv-
      Post 21.02.2014).



                             Figure 10: Cover Page




                             (KyivPost 24.01.2014)




      87    In this issue, KyivPost published the complete text of Charly Chaplin’s speech.
      88    In an article also published by MMIC (17.02.2014a), Transparency International delineates an immi-
            nent future scenario characterised by “continuous strife, civil war, and complete loss of indepen-
            dence” (recalling a “terrible” period of Ukrainian history in the 17th and 18th century) if Ukrainian
            society and authorities not choose to resolve the crisis soon by returning to the constitution of
            2004.
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           165

5.4 The Social Dimension: Selfs and Others on Maidan

As demonstrated in previous chapters (5.2/5.3), within the discursive arena that is re-
flected by the text corpus conflict topics and themes get differentiated from non-con-
flict ones (factual dimension). Likewise, the here and now of the conflict gets differenti-
ated from non-conflicting parts of the past and the future (temporal dimension). Con-
sidering the evolution of the Maidan protests as a conflict system in its social dimen-
sion means approaching the text corpus providing that conflict identities are consti-
tuted within communication itself and thus undergo change. Recalling Luhmann (1984:
426–436; see chapter 4.1), identities are understood as stable structures of expectation
appearing in reference to four layers: persons, roles, programmes, and norms. The syn-
opsis section (chapter 5.5) draws on these layers in greater detail. In preparation for this,
the following sections examine how discursive addresses get differentiated and repeat-
edly actualised.

Phase I (Nov 21 – Dec 30)

When on November 21 civil society activists and journalists met at Maidan to express
their incomprehension of the government’s decision to suspend the Association Agree-
ment with the EU, they were already referring and responding to a loosely defined com-
mon identity. Indeed, this was not just a simple reflex against government decisions ar-
ticulated out of a vaguely definable civil society. Since the frame of “EuroMaidan” had al-
ready been set with the help of social media, there was a common denominator for those
rejecting the government’s decision and thus a common identity (and a communicative
counterpart) as a party to an objective political contradiction. However, even though the
Maidan protests considerably increased in the first few days and “EuroMaidan” speci-
fied its arguments and positions (in a virtual process of self-understanding; see themes
and topics in 5.3.), government statements literally addressed “EuroMaidan” not until
November 27:

     “I’d like to address to citizens who are on streets, like now, to express their support to
     the course of European integration. After all, this is the main content of the actions
     that take place in the last days – what certain political forces would like to turn into
     conflict with the authorities. It is pointedly that the participants of EuroMaidan are
     trying to distance themselves from politicians. We’ve seen as people literally physi-
     cally ‘bypass’ opposition politicians, leave them aside from their declaration of will.”
     (Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, GovUkr 27.11.2013a, italics added)

As the above-cited statement suggests, after 6 days of mass protests that exceeded the
Orange Revolution early on, the government rhetorically recognised EuroMaidan as a
more or less legitimate political factor, if not as a political force in Ukrainian politics.89 On
the other hand, however, the situation of a mass movement that grew extremely quickly

89    In the first days of EuroMaidan, the government rather ignored the unprecedented size and quality
      of the mass protests in the first place. Later, the protests were even interpreted as an expression of
      support for the course of the government: “In whole the situation is stable and calm. […] The fact
166   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      and is backed up by a wide range of civil society branches seems to engender a certain
      discomfort within the authorities. Since EuroMaidan (at least in the early phase) had
      no leadership or management structure an institutionalised communicative counterpart
      was lacking. In this context, the government makes recourse to an auxiliary structure by
      insinuating that the opposition (that is obviously far more predictable than any anony-
      mous leader of EuroMaidan) tried to instrumentalise EuroMaidan:

          “Unfortunately, some opposition politicians do not leave attempts to convert the
          peaceful demonstration of will into crew-to-crew clashes. Law enforcement bodies
          should stop such attempts immediately.” (GovUkr 27.11.2013a)

      At this point, it should be stated that, based on the analysed documents from different
      civil society sources, the Ukrainian political opposition parties played a minor role as a
      communicative address during the Maidan protests as a whole. Although their leading
      figures were indeed present on Maidan and tried to influence the protest dynamics, they
      had never been perceived as protest leaders. Rather, they simply reacted to the moves on
      Maidan:

          “Euromaidan, ultimately a people’s convention in its form and essence, [is] an exclu-
          sively peaceful, tremendously massive assembly of active citizens, representatives
          of non-governmental organizations, youth and students. It [is] a democratic Maidan
          that stood under the Ukrainian national and European banners and had done its best
          to keep distance from politicians of all colors.” (MMIC 30.11.2013)

      To gather the process of emerging identities in conflict, media coverage acted as an im-
      portant projection surface since it particularly observed the changing nature of (indi-
      rect) communication between members of the government and the activists of Euro-
      Maidan (e.g. via interviews). Now, a common feature of the analysed media reports is
      that the political contradiction that stepped forward through the government’s unex-
      pected behaviour was straightaway observed as the expression of a deep historical cleav-
      age in Ukraine’s society and thus portrayed in a clear-cut way of reproducing correspond-
      ing parties to the standpoints:

          “A historical frontier between the world of established values, self-improvement, dis-
          cipline and development, and the world of complete unpredictability, paternalism,
          hierarchies, absolute power and absolute inert obedience, and irrational insecu-
          rities that can take decades and centuries to cure.” (The Ukrainian Week 22.11.2013: 6)

          Being in the centre of a clash between civilizations of the East and the West,
          Ukraine is both a detonator and an object to that clash. In many aspects, its
          upcoming choice is crucial to itself – and Europe’s future.” (The Ukrainian Week
          22.11.2013: 24)



           that people have taken these events so seriously proves that we are doing everything right. To a
           large extent, they are supporting our course. (GovUkr 26.11.2013e)
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014            167

In the aftermath of the summit in Vilnius, further media articles and headlines like “Be-
trayal of Hopes” (KyivPost 29.11.2013: 1) or “Ukraine’s big moment turns into major bust”
(KyivPost 29.11.2013: 7) continued to draw on this major division of Ukraine’s society
and, hence, fostered the actualisation and (re-) production of pointed positions which,
in turn, served as a starting points for dramatic speculations:

     “The polarization within Ukraine between Europhiles and Russophiles will intensify
     and major civil disturbances are now quite possible.” (KyivPost 29.11.2013: 5)

Phase II (Nov 30 – Dec 17)

In the light of the first violent crackdown on Maidan on November 30, the analysed media
did not neglect to point to further polarisations in Ukrainian society. Here, the finding
is that, beyond the traditional linguistic divide between Russian and Ukrainian speaking
parts of the population, many other “cracks in the nation” are beginning to show (see The
Ukrainian Week 3.12.2013: 8–11; KyivPost 6.12.2013: 1–3):

•    a deep crisis of confidence between the political opposition parties and civil society90 ;
•    an open infighting between various groups of interest within the ruling party (par-
     ticularly between the camps of different oligarchs);
•    an institutional dispute between those who try to strengthen the parliament’s rights
     and others who want to maintain a president-centred political system;
•    and finally, a confrontation between the political opposition and the government
     while both are “stuck in their bubbles” of winner-takes-it-all-scenarios.

Referring to the last point, the analysis of the government statements in phase II shows
that the government represents itself as a legitimate guardian of law and order which was
illegitimately challenged by “provocateurs” and “alarmists” who try to invoke a political
and economic crisis for no reason. Although expressing understanding and regret con-
cerning the massive use of force by law enforcement agencies and showing the govern-
ment as ready to engage in dialogue and compromise, the statements mainly document
the authorities’ overall rejection of EuroMaidan as being an anonymous and uncontrol-
lable mass infiltrated by criminals, saboteurs, radicals, extremists, and, most important,
by “immoral politicians hiding behind parliamentary immunity” (GovUkr 4.12.2013a).91
Moreover, members of the political opposition are presented as craving for power and
instrumentalising the Maidan protests for discrediting the government and pursuing
their personal power ambitions. In sum, based on the government’s communication,
EuroMaidan, at this point, not only constituted a temporary challenge for the rule of law

90    As, for example, the KyivPost (6.12.2013: 3) states, “Over the past week as the political crisis became
      critical, leaders of the opposition were accused of failing to lead and come up with a workable plan,
      frequently failing to be at the epicentre of events and formulating a coherent set of demands.”
      Therefore, to a great extent, the protests are presented as being both against the (former) “Or-
      ange government” (i.e. the political opposition) and the “White-and-Blue” (i.e. the actual Party of
      Regions government).
91    See particularly GovUkr (3.12.2013d; 3.12.2013g; 4.12.2013a; 5.12.2013e).
168   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      (e.g. concerning the protesters’ defiance of the legal ban of demonstrations) but also a
      concrete danger for Ukraine’s stability and national security since the functioning of the
      systems of life support, the operation of state administration and economic activities
      were directly threatened.92 Consequently, the government’s suggestions to deal with the
      situation (e.g. concerning the investigation of the use of force on Maidan) did not include
      addressing possible interlocutors from EuroMaidan but establishing a “trilateral format”
      with those understood as full-value representatives: the authorities, the opposition and
      the international community (see GovUkr 11.12.2013d).
          Based on the analysis of documents from civil society sources in phase II, two key
      developments can be retained: First, referring to various self-descriptions of partici-
      pants and supporters, the expectations of what EuroMaidan is and should be (i.e. its pro-
      gramme and norms) became increasingly articulated. Hereby, the self-image of Euro-
      Maidan as an expression of an independent civil society that considers itself as a separate
      entity besides the government and the political opposition parties played a major role.
      Further elements of EuroMaidan’s emerging identity included the programme of over-
      coming the above-mentioned cleavages in view of a common future backed by a young
      and progressive generation.93 What can also be found in the statements is the idea that
      EuroMaidan represents both a full-fledged ‘revolution’ and a political force able to act.
      As such, it feels a heavy responsibility for the whole country, as the following declaration
      of 100 leading EuroMaidan figures exemplarily shows:

           “We, the representatives of civil society Ukraine, recognising our responsibility to our
           descendants, […] having no doubt that further confrontation and escalation of the
           conflict threatens independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine and
           may lead to social and economic collapse.” (MMIC 10.12.2013e)

      As a part of EuroMaidan’s self-image, the statements also implicate references concern-
      ing the constitution of its main counterpart: In this context, Yanucovych is portrayed
      as the personification of an authoritarian and kleptocratic regime that jeopardises
      Ukraine’e independence by emulating a Russian-style political system and fostering
      societal cleavages and clientelism. However, according to a number of self-critical com-
      mentaries, the president only represents the figurehead of an already existing “corrupt
      and economically dependent police state” that had been tolerated and promoted by a
      “majoritarian mentality of indifference and passivity”.94
           Second, another important development on the part of EuroMaidan consists in the
      growing awareness of being dependent, to a certain extent, on the political opposition
      parties to bring about real change. On the one hand, indeed, negative attitudes towards
      all opposition politicians were widely shared among protesters on Maidan and their role
      in negotiations with the authorities were Argus-eyed. In fact, the protesters’ motivation
      was virtually independent from appeals of political party leaders, as the DIF poll among
      protesters shows:


      92    See GovUkr (7.12.2013c; 9.12.2013c; 11.12.2013a; 11.12.2013e).
      93    See e.g. MMIC (4.12.2013b; 9.12.2013) and UkrN (16.12.2014).
      94    See MMIC (12.12.2013a; 12.12.2013d; 13.12.2013) and UkrN (12.12.2013; 16.12.2014).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           169

Table 10: Extract from “Maidan 2013: Survey among Maidan Participants”

  What made you come out to the Maidan?
  Viktor Yanukovych’s refusal to sign the Association Agreement with the EU                      53.5
  Brutal beating of demonstrators at the Maidan on November 30 night, repressions                69.6
  Opposition leaders’ appeals                                                                    5.4
  Desire to change authorities in the country                                                    39.1
  Desire to change life in Ukraine                                                               49.9

(Own table according to DIF 10.12.2013)



     Furthermore, 92 % of the protesters on Maidan declared not to be a member of any
party, organisation, or movement. On the other hand, the protest movement gradually
realised the necessity to mandate and thus to empower either leaders of the political
parties or non-political civil society leaders in order to be able to effectively influence
the proceedings.95 Therefore, within the framework of roundtable negotiations, Euro-
Maidan protesters ascribed themselves the role of an attentive guard who urges both the
authorities and opposition parties to consider EuroMaidan’s claims and, as the above-
mentioned poll also shows, who would (at least 72.4 % of respondents) stay on Maidan
“as long as necessary”.96

Phase III (Dec 17 – Jan 16)

When the Russia-Ukraine-deal was concluded, EuroMaidan activists felt vindicated
with their speculations and fears: Based on the analysed statements, the virtual feelings
towards the Russian regime pulling the strings in the background changed to the very
concrete impression of a Russian president Putin who, once again, succeeded in coercing
Ukraine to stay in Russia’s sphere of influence (see e.g. MMIC 22.12.2013). At the same
time, from civil society’s perspective, the existing cracks within Ukraine’s ruling party
and the regime became more and more articulated. In this context, Ukraine’s oligarch
class is observed as being split in at least three factions: one that supports the status
quo, one that supports the Russia-Ukraine-deal and a third one that truly supports
EuroMaidan and European integration (see MMIC 23.12.2013c). As advocates of the
latter openly stated,




95   This point is also repeatedly referred to in the analysed media: “Without politicians, the speeches
     of civil activists were doomed to fail and disdain from those in power. [Therefore] political and civil
     Maidans announced that they pursued a common goal.” (The Ukrianian Week 3.12.2013: 11)
96   See MMIC (5.12.2013a; 9.12.2013; 10.12.2013d; 12.12.2013a; 16.12.2013b) and UkrN (16.12.2013). In the
     analysed media reports, this point is repeatedly picked up later on (see e.g. The Ukrainian Week
     23.12.2013: 5): “Maidan is not a mere demonstration. It is a long-term action. […] Maidan will re-
     main the factor of Ukrainian politics in the memory of Ukraine and international community, if
     not in the minds of those in power.”
170   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

           “Everyone wants clarity. […] The fact that peaceful people went to peaceful protests
           shows that Ukraine is a free, democratic country. No one will take Ukraine from that
           path. And that is really great.” (Rinat Akhmetov, MMIC 17.12.2013c)

      In addition to the one or other renegade oligarch97 , voices from EuroMaidan particularly
      referred to the many small and medium-size businesses that also sponsor EuroMaidan,
      for example by directly providing help to maintain the protest infrastructure or by pub-
      licly criticising the government and declaring their support for the protesters. In this
      context, the emergence of a “socially responsible economy” was observed and articulated
      as a relevant factor in conflict.98
           Given the analysis of the media coverage in phase III, it can be stated that the media,
      too, exhaustively addressed the latent infighting between “the hawks” and “the doves”
      within the ruling Party of Regions, which became manifest. In this context, the massive
      use of force against protesters on Maidan (especially on November 30 and December 11)
      is presented as a consequence of the confrontation between different groups of influence
      within the authorities, or, more precisely, as the hawks’ attempt to get the upper hand by
      strikingly showing the state’s monopoly on legitimate violence (see e.g. The Ukrainian
      Week 23.12.2013: 12–13). In short, according to media reports, the hawks, at this point,
      were expected to launch new waves of violence and repression in any form (e.g. perse-
      cution, interrogation, intimidation and mudslinging) in order to evoke fear among the
      protesters. However, the purport of media coverage remains unmistakeable about the
      attitudes both on Maidan and in the population at large:

           “But the experience of effective joint action will not vanish. People have savoured
           freedom, courage, responsibility and trust for each other. Communities of proactive
           citizens have to respond with local Maidans to every violation of human rights or
           abuse of power. No functionary or representative of the regime should now feel im-
           pudent.” (The Ukrainian Week 23.12.2013: 5)99

      In parallel to this unprecedented level of determinism on the protesters’ side advanced in
      media accounts, the analysed statements from civil society sources in phase III are sug-
      gesting that EuroMaidan indeed entered a critical stage of defining its self-understand-
      ing. As mentioned earlier, the common refusal of the Russia-Ukraine-deal derided as



      97    After the violent crackdown on protesters on Maidan and in the occupied administration building
            of the city of Kiev on December 11, Rinat Akhmetov (head of System Capital Management Group,
            Ukraine’s leading financial and industrial firm, particularly in mining and steel), Dmytro Firtash
            (head of Group DF, leading in chemical industries and natural gas) and Viktor Pinchuk (head of In-
            terpipe Group, one of Ukraine’ leading pipe, wheel and steel producers) publicly distanced them-
            selves from the government for the first time (see e.g. The Ukrainian Week 23.12.2013: 12).
      98    See e.g. UkrN (19.12.2013); later on, towards the end of EuroMaidan, see MMIC (14.02.2014).
      99    This assessment mirrors a number of documents from civil society opposition. Thus, comments
            under the header of “Ukraine’s revolution of dignity“, for example, emphasise that Ukrainians, at
            last, picked up courage and willingness to take control of their own destiny (see MMIC 27.12.2013c).
            In the same vein, INGO reports state that EuroMaidan represents an incomparable “civic mobiliza-
            tion” urging for institutionalised ways of political participation (see e.g. UHHRU 27.12.2013).
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   171

“Putin-Yanucovych-anti-Western-pact” again boosted the motivation and the consen-
sus among the protesters (see MMIC 31.12.2013d). By the turn of the year, statements
increasingly articulate the urge that EuroMaidan should institutionalise and thus equip
itself with comprehensive organisational structures in order to be able to accomplish its
objectives:

    “The task at hand is to spread the values of the Maidan beyond Ukraine’s capital,
    and to prepare capacity that will ensure a free and fair vote in March 2015. Clearly,
    this task requires some form of organizational structure that is of a national scale.”
    (MMIC 1.01.2014)

In an effort to distance itself from the political (party) establishment, EuroMaidan re-
luctantly started to set up organisational structures. Therefore, within the framework
of the “All-Ukrainian Assembly Maidan”, leading figures of EuroMaidan established a
governing body including political and “non-political” actors. Against the background of
a widespread scepticism towards functionaries, this provisional structure was not only
meant to represent the voice of camping Maidan protesters and to coordinate their de-
mands and activities with Ukraine’s numerous real civil society organizations and oppo-
sition political parties. Also, the council was meant as a measure to build “institutional
trust” in a society that broadly distrusted social institutions and to back the “identity
revolution” that had been in progress (see MMIC 1.01.2014). In fact, societal support for
EuroMaidan became increasingly broad and diversified, as e.g. a viral video message by
more than 50 Ukrainians from all walks of life addressed to president Yanucovych shows:

    “The future of Ukraine lies in our hands, not in yours. We are Europeans. We will be
    in the EU. With you or without you.” (MMIC 3.01.2014b)

Even though the younger generation, particularly the students’ movements, proved to be
the strongest protest driver (see MMIC 4.01.2014a), the sphere of EuroMaidan’s highly
motivated supporters became increasingly broader, including, for example, religious
leaders who began to openly participate in the protests:

    “Dear Ukrainians, ignore the corruption of the information, with which they want
    to discourage us and use to make us fight amongst one another, they want to once
    again return us into the state of being a helpless grey biomass. We are free, strong
    and happy. We have our faith and our personal dignity. We are – unique and virtuous.
    We – shall overcome!” (MMIC 5.01.2014a)100

In sum, based on the analysis of statements from EuroMaidan voices in phase III, it can
be stated that EuroMaidan’s process of self-understanding resulted in a twofold insight:
First, in a self-and external perception, EuroMaidan represented the embodiment of
an unprecedented level of civil society mobilisation if not the awakening of civil soci-
ety in post-Soviet Ukraine at all. Second, from a pragmatic perspective, to position it-

100 Common statement of a mufti of the Spiritual Admistration of Muslims of Ukraine and a represen-
    tative of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in Maidan.
172   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      self as an efficacious political force distinct from the government and traditional opposi-
      tion parties, EuroMaidan protesters realised that at least some basic organisational stru-
      tures were needed; the “All-Ukrainian Assembly Maidan” mentioned above and the “All-
      Ukrainian Euromaidan Forums” that followed in mid-January in Kharkiv (for a chronicle
      see MMIC 14.01.2014a) and in mid-February in Odesa represented attempts to do so.
           Regarding the emergence of EuroMaidan as an increasingly “institutionalised”
      revolution claiming political heft, the authorities, at this point, reacted in two different
      ways. According to the analysed statements, first, EuroMaidan was officially portrayed
      as an important impulse that, by “national roundtable talks, political disputes, and
      honest dialogue”, helped to debate and to confirm the government’s plans to establish
      “a balance between the East and West without giving up our national interests”, as
      president Yanucovych summarised in his New Year’s address (see MMIC 3.01.2014b).
      Second, once again, political opposition parties are blamed for their alleged efforts to
      “hijack” Maidan protests for the sake of their own power ambitions. In this context,
      EuroMaidan is partly portrayed as an “illegal and immoral revolution” since it not only
      blocks state functions and thus deprives the population of indispensable assistance but
      also because even children are used for their purposes:

          “So-called leaders of the Maidan forgot, the moral manifesto of Dostoevsky: ‘No rev-
          olution is worth the tear of a child’? I’d like to ask all parents in Ukraine whether you
          want such immoral orders, as on Maidan for your children.” (GovUkr 15.01.2014a)

      Phase IV (Jan 16 – Feb 22)

      The adoption of the “anti-protest laws” was accompanied by a tightening of the official
      rhetoric towards protests on Maidan. While insinuating that the leaders of the political
      opposition were in cahoots with leading figures of EuroMaidan, voices from the ruling
      Party of Regions denounced protest leaders as being “criminal” and “immoral”. Thereby,
      apart from EuroMaidan’s defiance towards the government’s law enforcement measures,
      its lack of respect for religious authorities played an important role, especially concerning
      the calls to protest on the Day of the Baptism of the Lord (January 19), which is a central
      feast day in the Orthodox Churches. Furthermore, according to the analysed documents,
      protesters were portrayed as ruthless and violent revolutionaries who emerged from an
      atmosphere of hysteria and hate created by “stage directors” on the sideline. However, at
      this point, the latter were accused of having lost control over the mass that now shows
      the “beastly grin of extremism” (see UkrN 20.01.2014b). In sum, it can be stated that the
      government repeatedly confirmed the allegation that the political opposition was directly
      responsible for the “escalation of violence and the devastating consequences for the coun-
      try”. In addition, it once again attributed itself the role of a defender of the constitutional
      order and the stability of the country, which is – and that is the first time since the be-
      ginning of the protests – depicted as being threatened by “pogrom and terrorists” (see
      GovUkr 22.01.2014a).
          Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           173

      “There is a coup d’etat attempt in Ukraine. And all who support this coup must explic-
      itly say: yes, we are for overthrow the legitimate authority in Ukraine and not to hide
      behind the peaceful protesters.” (Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, GovUkr 23.01.2014e)

Nevertheless, while the language continued in a rather confrontative mode, the anal-
ysed government statements still include some passages documenting the willingness
to hold a constructive dialogue with those political forces and those politicians “who are
not spoilers and do not destabilize the situation” (see GovUkr 22.01.2014a, g).
     Based on the analysis of documents from civil society opposition, the government’s
call for dialogue went unheard in the light of the adopted anti-protest laws. From Euro-
Maidan’s perspective, president Yanucovych, ultimately, not only furnished the evidence
for being “ignorant, primitive and, concerning his worldview and perception, literally
bestial” but also for being a puppet in Putin’s hands (UkrN 20.01.2014c). In this sense, the
anti-protest laws with all the methods of repression were outlined as carrying a blatantly
obvious Russian thumbprint.101 Against this background, the protesters’ anger was of
course directed at the authorities that allowed the Russian political and economic elite
to gain extensive influence over Ukraine (see UkrN 22.01.2014). At the same time, the
protesters articulated their frustration about EuroMaidan’s inability to take responsibil-
ity and to develop a successful leadership of the movement while the people’s freedom
was on the verge of being sold out.

      “People are tired of politicians’ flowery words, claiming to know how to save the
      country […]. We don’t have a way back. Either we will win, or they will put us in
      jail.” (MMIC 21.01.2014c)

Indeed, in view of two months long mass protests without any concrete success (com-
pared to the declared goals), the analysed statements show signs of a certain atmosphere
of demoralisation both on the protesters’ side and even among police forces (see e.g.
MMIC 21.01.2014d). In this atmosphere, the belief in solutions based on roundtable talks
dramatically faded:

      “Those roundtables during the past two months are nothing but grotesque imita-
      tions that convinced the people of that fact that the government only understands
      a language of violence. That’s why a part of the population proceeded to violent re-
      sistance.” (UkrN 25.01.2014c)

As the first deaths of protesters became known on January 22 and, in the same breath,
the violent escalation was portrayed (by government sources and some international


101    As some INGO reports about the anti-protest laws suggest, the Ukrainian and Russian legal texts
       in this field have a great deal in common, e.g. particularly with regards to “dangerous activities” of
       civic organisation or the asserted need for continuous censorship of the Internet (see e.g. UUHRU
       20.01.2014a). Media reports, too, extensively address the closeness of Ukrainian and Russian leg-
       islation. Referring to the raised budget for inner security and the newly adopted rights and instru-
       ments of security forces, the media shows gallows humour: “Welcome to the new police state. We
       call it Little Russia.” (Kyiv Post 17.01.2014: 5)
174   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      media accounts) as being invoked by nationalist and far-right elements on Maidan,
      the protesters’ anger was boosted and immediately focussed on the supposed “Russian
      hand” behind the events (see UkrN 24.01.2014c, 25.01.2014a, 27.01.2014a). At the same
      time, influential oligarchs (like e.g. Rinat Akhmetov) raised their hand to offer commis-
      erations and regret concerning the victims of violence (as the government also did a
      few days later; see GovUkr 29.01.2014e) and to express their perceived responsibility as
      business leaders to speak up in crisis:

          “Business cannot keep silent when people are killed, a real danger of breakup of the
          country emerges, when a political crisis can lead to a deep economic recession and
          thus inevitably result in lower standards of living. [...] Any use of force and weapons
          is unacceptable. With this scenario there will be no winners in Ukraine, only victims
          and losers. [...] The only solution is to move from street riots and attempts to curb
          them to constructive negotiations and results.” (UkrN 25.01.2014b)

      At least since these statements, observers from civil society opposition highlighted that,
      at this point, the different power groups within the ruling regime, particularly oligarchs
      divided into doves and hawks began to fall apart whereas the hawks were definitely be-
      lieved to prevail in view of the massive use of force against protesters and the possible
      imposition of martial law (see MMIC 29.01.2014a). Therefore, from EuroMaidan’s per-
      spective, the parties to the conflict were cleat-cut: On one side of the frontline, which
      is physically symbolised by the barricades in Kiev, those who defend themselves, their
      country, and their European future,

          “[…] some with Molotov cocktails, some with knitting needles, some with baseball
          bats, some with texts published on the Internet, some with photos documenting the
          atrocities.” (MMIC 29.01.2014c)

      On the other side of the frontline: the “tyrant and his group of criminals” (backed by a pro-
      Russian economic and political lobby) who were the first to shed blood of innocent people
      and thus are not only expected to continue to use violence against their own people but
      also to threaten Europe as a whole. Based on that, “the protests will not continue in a
      peaceful way” (see e.g. UkrN 30.01.2014b).
          Since the first deaths of protesters on Maidan, media coverage left no doubt about
      the “dramatic new escalation of violence” and its initiators.102 Thereby, media reports,
      too, made use of metaphorically characterising parties to the conflict “on this side” and
      “on that side” of the barricades:




      102 As the KyivPost (24.01.2014: 5) stated, there was unmistakable evidence of state-sanctioned
          snipers firing at EuroMaidan activists from the roofs of buildings flanking Maidan square.
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014           175

Table 11: Parties to the conflict displayed by media accounts in late January

  “On this side” (EuroMaidan)                             “On that side” (Government)
  people believing in a state as “a guarantee and         “a corporation of personal enrichment”
  instrument for natural rights of the people”            “people who deny market economy, competition
  “people who prefer to earn their living without         and free market and prefer to live on violence and
  fear, grow, develop and travel the world, and most      robbery” (The Ukrainian Week 30.01.2014: 16)
  importantly be independent from the whims of            people who tolerate “hired thugs to clear
  their domestic or foreign rulers”                       protesters off the streets and terrorize peaceful
  “people on this side of the barricade will not          demonstrators”
  forgive a conspirancy against themselves, from          “a few handfuls of radicals and facists from west-
  this government or any other that will replace it”      ern Ukraine” are used are alleged as a pretext to
  (The Ukrainian Week 31.01.2014: 16)                     justify violence against all protesters
  people who “want to make sure that the country          people who “grumble that the government is
  allows all its diversity, and that they coexist in a    doing to little to crack down on the protesters”
  peaceful manner regulated by an efficient, clear        (KyivPost 31.01.2014: 4–5)
  and applicable set of rules” (KyivPost 31.01.2014: 5)

(Own table)



    According to the sparse government statements in early February, EuroMaidan was
increasingly dominated and controlled by far-right extremists.103 Seen from this angle,
both security forces and peaceful protesters became victims of atrocities committed by
a mob, which had been incited by militant nationalists and, at this point, got out of con-
trol.104 At the same time, however, EuroMaidan activists gathered more and more evi-
dence that proved the excessive use of violence by security forces and Titushki against
unarmed protesters: Eyewitness reports and videos document many cases of beatings,
torture, targeted shootings, taking away clothes at sub-zero temperatures, kidnappings
from hospital, destruction of properties, and intimidation of family members (see UkrN
6.02.2014a). Based on the analysed documents, the protesters’ widely shared feeling of
being a victim of state power at any time increasingly led to an emotional dissociation
and even to a hate-filled devaluation of the state as a whole and particularly towards se-
curity forces on Maidan:

    “Those guys are aliens! They are not ours. They have some sort of strange accent.
    And they don’t behave as they should at home. And after all, they are freaks. People
    like that don’t grow up here.” (UkrN 7.02.2014b)


103 As, for example, the KyivPost (7.02.2014: 2) notes, this assessment was not only articulated by pro-
    government actors and Russian media but also by Western journalists. However, later on, in an
    obvious effort to counter the widespread rumour of the “Right Sector” taking control of Maidan,
    EuroMaidan sources published reports about Ukrainian Jews holding leading positions on Maidan,
    e.g. within self-defence units that were responsible for the reinforcement and defence of the bar-
    ricades (see e.g. UkrN 13.02.2014).
104 See e.g. GovUkr (4.02.2014d). In this context, official sources drew attention to the “dangerous and
    difficult” job of security forces who suffered a great number of injured police officers since the
    beginning of the protests on Maidan (see UkrN 6.02.2014a).
176   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      From EuroMaidan’s perspective, the atmosphere on Maidan in mid-February dramati-
      cally changed from frustration and despair to a scenario of increasing tension and con-
      frontation, as self-reflexive comments show:

          “The situation on Maidan is pretty tense. People wish to take vengeance for the vic-
          tims and, even more important, they are tired of the opposition’s failure to act. All
          these hotheads are full of illusions about real fighting and thus cannot imagine the
          possible consequences.” (UkrN 13.02.2014)

      Against this background of uncertainty about how the majority of protesters and security
      forces would get out the standoff, media accounts made an effort to present an overview
      of the complex situation, including, for example, a characterisation of the many factions
      that evolved from Maidan up to this point (see table 12).



      Table 12: Overview on factions/subgroups on Maidan in mid-February

                   Name               Goal                 Method              Strength/ Weakness
                                                           ready to lead
                                      creation of a                            prepared to use force
                   Right Sector                            revolution and to
                                      “true” Ukraine                           against government
                                                           die for it
                                                                               highly able to set others
                                                                               in motion; set up as a civic
                   “Spilna                                 takeover of
                                      complete change                          group to support small
                   Sprava” (Com-                           government
                                      of power                                 and medium businesses;
                   mon Cause)                              buildings
                                                                               became one of the most
        anti-                                                                  militant protest units
        govern-                                                                highly organized, rigid
        ment                                               paramilitary
                                      defend the                               structure, but accused of
                   Maidan Self-                            defense units
                                      protests and                             using weapons; sprang up
                   Defense                                 that patrol the
                                      their bases                              after Dec 1, when protests
                                                           perimeter
                                                                               in Ukraine grew massive
                                                           paramilitary
                                                           defense and
                   Afghan             defend the                               small group but well-
                                                           guerilla warfare-
                   veterans           protesters                               organized
                                                           style tactics if
                                                           needed
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   177


                                                                       mobile and agile, but lack-
                                                                       ing experience to trans-
                               total change of
             Student move-                         networking,         form ideas into change; a
                               power, reform of
             ments                                 legal proposals     crucial part of EuroMaidan
                               education sector
                                                                       during its first, most ro-
                                                                       mantic stage
                                                                       bright, but small and
                               public protests     information         divided group with no
             Public Sector     that lead to        campaigns, cre-     common vision; many
             of EuroMaidan     comprehensive       ation of strate-    types of activists that
                               changes             gies                coordinated protests since
                                                                       Nov 21
                                                                       best of all tactical forces,
                                                                       but often heavy-handed;
                               protect govern-                         revered by the pro-gov-
             Berkut                                truncheons,
                               ment buildings                          ernment side, despised
             (“Golden Ea-                          shields, water
                               and quell public                        by many on the other;
             gles”), riot-                         cannons and
                               protests when                           Ukraine’s elite riot police
             control police                        guns
                               ordered                                 force, the best and fiercest
                                                                       of those who made it
                                                                       through military training
                               protect govern-
             Interior          ment buildings                          strong as a group, weak
                                                   truncheons,
             Ministry          and quell public                        on their own; not to be
                                                   shields
  pro-       special troops    protests when                           confused with the Berkut
  govern-                      ordered
  ment                         destabilize
                               demonstra-          brute force,        endorsed by the govern-
             Titushki          tions, attack       beatings, kid-      ment and Russia, not
                               anti-government     nappings            smart
                               protesters
                                                                       endorsed by the govern-
                                                                       ment and Russia; created
                               federalization
                                                                       in Kharkiv on Jan 29 as an
                               of Ukraine, push
             Ukrainian                                                 attempt by government
                               back interna-       unclear
             Front                                                     forces to push back against
                               tionalists and
                                                                       what they perceive as
                               radicals
                                                                       a neo-Nazi threat from
                                                                       western Ukraine

(Own table based on KyivPost 14.02.2014: 2–5)
178   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

          Given this broad range of subgroups on Maidan105 , the last attempts of roundtable
      talks between the government and representatives of the different groups present on
      Maidan faced enormous challenges. Though, they resulted in at least some partial
      achievements: While some of the buildings and streets were cleared, detained protesters
      were granted amnesty. However, the leaders of the political opposition parties still
      rejected the offer to participate in a new government.

          “A roundtable with gangsters? We’ve done that one. The trouble is that not a single
          demand was taken seriously. While we lost time with negotiations, the government
          took the opportunity to kidnap, torture, and arrest people.” (UkrN 18.02.2014)

      Accordingly, right before the death toll on Maidan skyrocketed, the protesters definitely
      relinquished all hope that the situation could be settled in a peaceful way.



      5.5 Synopsis: The Fabric of Escalating Moves

          “The fact dimension, the temporal dimension, and the social dimension cannot ap-
          pear in isolation. They must be combined. They can be analyzed separately, but in
          every real intented meaning, they appear together.” (Luhmann 1995: 86)


      According to Luhmann’s dimensions of meaning, the preceding chapters presented three
      paths of preliminarily reading the conflict development within the context of the Maidan
      protests. Now, the many hypotheses of different ranges that have been iteratively gained
      during case study research and then cast in form of the chapters above are brought to-
      gether in a synoptical view. Hence, the following chapters highlight critical elements of
      conflict development, i.e. escalating moves (A-F) consisting of structural couplings and nor-
      mative shifts, and, linked to that, the gradual formation of firm conflict identities against
      the background of a world societal grounding of contradictions.106

      5.5.1 The Conflict’s Groundwork (Phase I, Nov 21 – Nov 30)

      As it has been shown, right from the beginning of the Maidan protests in late November
      2013, ‘EuroMaidan’ appears as a key discursive reference within the analysed communi-
      cation. Independent of the discursive working levels set up in the case study work plan,
      EuroMaidan represents a frequent buzzword in the whole text corpus and thus displays
      high connectivity. During phase one, EuroMaidan evolves into a veritable signifier for



      105 Although playing a certain role on Maidan, groups affiliated to the three political opposition par-
          ties were omitted in the figure above for reasons of clarity.
      106 Please note: The synopsis chapters of both case studies (5.5/6.5) use a number of tables and charts
          of contrasting grey colour compared to the main text body. These tables indeed refer to and pick
          up elements of the continuous text, but they do not necessarily contain duplications of it. In other
          words, they are to be considered as substantial parts of the reflecting interpretation part of this
          case study’s analysis.
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   179

different discursive ‘construction sites’. In doing so, economic considerations (e.g. ad-
dressing the pros and cons of being a part of the European market) get straightforwardly
linked to political communication that suggests understanding the foreign policy deci-
sion not to sign the AA with the EU as a question of either Ukraine’s eastern or western
orientation and thus as a question of diverging power claims (as the government state-
ment below exemplarily exposes):

    “We trade with Russia in approximately similar volumes as with Europe. Hence, we
    cannot lose someone of them. If an enterprise working with Russia stops, people
    will remain without work. And it will become our problem. For this reason we spare
    no effort today so that not to have disagreement with Russia and to maintain ab-
    solutely transparent relations with the European Union.” (First Vice Prime Minister
    Serhiy Arbuzov; GovUkr 27.11.2013h)

In this way, the economic language about the logic of the market, e.g. concerning
Ukraine’s competitiveness with regard to certain goods, gets collectively translated into
a political one, i.e. dealing with perceptions of a changing domestic and, at the same
time, regional/international balance of power:

    “Ukraine could not withstand the economic pressure and blackmail. It was threat-
    ened with restricted imports of its goods to Russia, particularly from companies in
    Eastern Ukraine, which accommodates the greater share of its industry and employs
    hundreds of thousands of people.” (MMIC 22.11.2013b)

Hence, communication that has previously exhibited either a political or economic mode
of observation now gets understandable in a broader and common communicative spec-
trum. This becomes apparent regarding the main thematic focus of the first phase (see
exemplary text passages above): What used to be interpreted as a one-side balance of
trade concerning Ukraine’s standing in world economy (i.e. close economic relations be-
tween Eastern Ukraine and Russia) is then also seen as an instrument to exercise influ-
ence and power. In short, the relationship between both systems, the economic and the
political one, takes the shape of a structural coupling and thus further develops the struc-
tures of the conflict system by broadening its communicative basis.
    Behind these dynamics, there are offers of meaning, which show a world societal
framing. As the term EuroMaidan itself epitomises, competing modes of differentiation
find their expressions in the discourse: On the one hand, overlooking the different dis-
cursive working levels and the respective groups of text data sources, there are references
to EuroMaidan on many sides. They suggest understanding European integration and EU
as a more or less desirable or, at least, relevant socio-political superstructure that is able
to produce collectively binding beneficial decisions and, therefore, to exercise political
power in parallel to the nation state (see exemplary text passages from government and
civil society actors below; italics added).

    “We need to take the final steps that will lead our country to a higher level of re-
    lations with the EU. […] The positive effects of integration the country can feel when
180   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

          our economy will interact with European economies. [This] will help ensure European
          standards of life of our citizens.” (GovUkr 18.11.2013)

          “Citizens of Ukraine […] fight for their European future in a united Europe. […] They
          need attention and support of the European citizens who already enjoy those European
          values.” (UkrN 24.11.2013)

          “Just the President and the Government of Ukraine have decisively turned the
          political course towards practical implementation of criteria of European Union mem-
          bership […]. [T]he work on approaching Ukraine to the European standards hasn’t
          stopped a day.” (Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, GovUkr 27.11.2013c)

      On the other hand, EuroMaidan is attributed to be the incarnation of Ukraine’s
      sovereignty. In this regard, Kiev’s “Independence Square” does not only serve as a
      popular physical venue. Rather, it is widely referred to as a virtual symbol of Ukraine’s
      self-determination and national identity. As it has been presented in the context of the
      conflict’s temporal dimension (see chapter 5.3), referring to the Ukrainian nation state as
      the ultimate arena of political events is particularly highlighted by the historical example
      of the Orange Revolution of 2004, which gets immediately cited in the discourse. In
      this context, the Orange Revolution is romanticised as a rising up of nationally oriented
      Ukrainian citizens against post-Soviet (but still Soviet-minded) elites in order to enforce
      a just implementation of their interests (i.e. the recognition of the people as sovereign,
      especially with regard to democratic elections). In this sense, EuroMaidan is discursively
      addressed as a follow-up of the Orange Revolution and thus as part of Ukraine’s pursuit
      of national self-determination and emancipation from geopolitical patronisation:

          “Ukrainians gathered on Maidan in Kiev, which became the venue of the Orange
          Revolution, to fight for justice. On this square, Ukrainians made their history. Today
          again, they are there to fight for their European future.” (UkrN 24.11.2013)

      However, in turn, this interpretation gets contradicted with reference to the political,
      economic, and social turbulences unleashed by revolutions in Ukrainian history, which
      are presented as rather negative incidences that sustainably harmed the nation’s security
      and independence. Therefore, in this episode, EuroMaidan gets picked up in a (at least)
      double meaning. Between these poles of a capricious discourse, a perception of unpre-
      dictability and uncertainty gains ground. In doing so, once again, the Orange Revolution
      appears as a landmark raised to sort what is happening at that moment:

          “It is hard to see how long people will stay in the streets for political speeches
          and concerts. One big difference – and disadvantage – for protesters is that this is
          different from the 2004 Orange Revolution, when a clear goal was achieved. The
          rigged election that year was overturned by the Supreme Court. A new election
          was held. Most people (except Yanukovych and his supporters) accepted the result
          of the rerun election. This time, however, the goal – an EU-Ukraine association
              Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   181

      agreement – doesn’t have a strict timeline or deadline. So now what?” (KyivPost
      29.11.2013: 4)

To sum up, in phase I, the gradual emergence of overlapping contradictions is observed
within the discourse. Following these articulated contradictions, the differentiation of
the conflict system’s dimensions of meaning can be illustrated (see table 13).



Table 13: Dimensions of the conflict system/phase I

    Dimension             Poles of Contradiction
                          deepening relations with                      explicitly orienting Ukraine
                          Russia                                        towards Europe
    factual
                          conforming to binary                          national emancipation and
                          geopolitical condition                        independence
                                                          versus
                          Orange Revolution as his-
                                                                        EuroMaidan as necessary follow-
    temporal              torical failure and source of
                                                                        up of Orange Revolution
                          long term instability
    social                post-Soviet elites                            newly developing civil society

(Own table)



   As these contradictions get discursively visible, they simultaneously ground the
gradual formation of conflict identities that begin to show up on different intercon-
nected layers (see chapter 4.1 for this study’s concept of identity based on Luhmann),

•     as different persons and (their respective) roles (e.g. “anti-government protester”,
      “pro-European activist”, “civil society campaigner”, “decision makers”, “office hold-
      ers”, etc.);
•     as different programmes of action (e.g. demonstrating for EU association; defending
      civil society; defending the status quo; etc.);
•     and as different norms (e.g. democratic participation; political and social change; po-
      litical stability and security).

Contradictions and conflict identities are thus two sides of the same coin. In sum, based
on the case study’s analysis of the text corpus, the conflict system’s development in phase
I is characterised by escalating move A. As summarised above, this move consists of a
structural coupling of the economic and the political narrative of contradiction.
     Moreover, it consists of a normative shift, which takes place when the quasi-fusion
of economic communication (e.g. on market opening and visa exemption) and politi-
cal communication (e.g. on democratic/authoritarian models of society) broadens the
conflict discourse and thus leads to the effect that a broader range of persons feel di-
rectly included, i.e. addressed as relevant to the conflict (e.g. as consumers and voters and
travellers). Against the background of the emerging politico-economic conflict discourse
182   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      perceived as a kind of cross-sector arena, non-partisan civil society gets observed as a
      separate political force able and willing to articulate itself and to shape Ukraine’s future.
      In this context, the discursive processing of this phenomenon shows a world societal
      horizon of communication on both discursive working levels. When focussing on politi-
      cal frameworks of orientation as point of departure, there are two clusters of statements:
      For one thing, statements that promote the idea of national independence and self-de-
      termination (discursively condensed in “-Maidan”) and underline the essential role of the
      nation state as the principal category of political (self-) observation. At the same time,
      there are other statements that show a decidedly “post-national” view of politics (dis-
      cursively condensed in “Euro-”), which includes the idea of collectively binding decisions
      based on a canon of supranational modern (European) values and norms (including free-
      dom of expression, individualism, free trade etc.). Ergo, the discourse features compet-
      ing modes of observation and, thus, competing principles of differentiation that gen-
      erate new offers of meaning, new potential of contradiction and, as a result, increasing
      connectivity within a growing conflict system.

      5.5.2 Revolution, Legality, and the Use of Force (Phase II, Nov 30 – Dec 17)

      As stated earlier, the beginning of phase II is marked by the observation (shared all over
      the discourse) of the first physically violent actions that include a large quantity of per-
      sons:

          “Video footage shows Berkut officers beating protestors and in some cases pursuing
          men and women in order to beat them. About 35 people have so far been charged
          with hooliganism under the Administrative Code and dozens of people are being
          treated for their injuries. […] someone decided that enough was enough and the
          protests had to end.” (AI 30.11.2013)

          “On Nov. 30, all the evidence shows that police were the instigators of a delib-
          erate and violent crackdown on 400 or so demonstrators. Eyewitnesses and video
          showed indiscriminate beatings. […] As for Dec. 1, [somebody] commandeered a
          bulldozer and three Molotov cocktails at police.” (KyivPost 6.12.2013: 4)

      Overlooking phase II, two escalating moves were identified: The origins of the first one,
      escalating move B, can already be observed in phase I. However, its true discursive impact
      comes to light only in the aftermath of the violent incidences of November 30 and Decem-
      ber 1. As the analysis of the text corpus suggests, here, a new structural coupling begins to
      develop: the politico-economic conflict narrative, which has been pre-formative with re-
      gard to the formation of fractions and initial conflict identities during phase I (see above),
      now gets expanded by integration of communication from a legal context. In this sense,
      it can be stated that incidences are now increasingly observed with “legal glasses”. For
      example, whereas civil society actors point to the “unlawful, brutal and unsparing use
      of force” in order to “squash Ukrainian citizens’ right of peaceful assembly and speech”
      (MMIC 2.12.2013b), government officials apologise for “the actions of law enforcement
      agencies” by referring to the “illegal actions” of protesters that “violate not only the Con-
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014         183

stitution of Ukraine but also the Criminal Code” (GovUkr 3.12.2013d).107 At the same time,
media coverage of EuroMaidan highlights that protesters demand the president’s resig-
nation since “impeachment is not an option as the procedure is not even clearly outlined
in legislation.” (KyivPost 6.12.2013: 3) In addition, in the middle of phase II, a newly pub-
lished poll provides an insight into the motivations of protesters (DIF 10.12.2018; see in
detail chapter 5.4). Therein, 69.6 percent of the protesters state that the most important
motivation to come out protesting on Maidan is again linked to legal considerations: a
disproportionate use of force on Nov 30/ Dec 1 and, in relation to that, an unlawful re-
pression of protesters and the Ukrainian people in general since the beginning of the
protests. So, based on the analysis of the text corpus, it can be stated that the legal mode
of observation becomes very common.
     This points towards new contradictions, which, in turn, include world societal ref-
erences. Regarding the observation of the “unlawful use of force”, this gets particularly
clear. Throughout the text corpus in phase II there is evidence that the use of force is not
only perceived as breach of national law; even government sources agree that the police’s
code of conduct was violated on Nov 30/Dec 1. However, the incidences are also assessed
against the background of a legal system that overlies the national one: the global human
rights regime. In this way, the unlawful use of force gets also interpreted as a “human
rights violation” (MMIC 2.12.2013b). In this view, the incidences are not seen as covered
by the state’s monopoly on the use of force anymore but as a violation of globally an-
chored rights. As a consequence, in this phase, (new) human rights initiatives enter the
stage and defend the principles of proportionality, freedom of assembly and expression
backed up by global argumentation.108 Moreover, a number of references to the “Inter-
national Human Rights Day” (Dec 10) within the discourse suggest that the international
legal framework represents an important reference point.
     The expansion of the conflict discourse by the legal dimension is associated with a
normative shift that takes place in parallel. As it became apparent, in phase II, the “project
EuroMaidan” is increasingly described in terms of a “real revolution”, i.e. the idea that
EuroMaidan lines up with prior important revolutions in Ukraine (and world history)
and thus represents a special window of opportunity for realising true change.109 Against

107 Furthermore, government officials state that despite all “flaws and mistakes in the work of govern-
    ment” all protest actions have to be performed within “the constitutional legal field”. Therefore,
    the seizure of administrative and public buildings has to be rated as “a criminal offense”. (GovUkr
    3.12.2013g, 4.12.2013d)
108 See for example “EuromaidanSOS” mentioned earlier (in chapter 5.2). However, besides new hu-
    man rights initiatives, already existing organisations, such as the “Ukrainian Helsinki Human
    Rights Union”, got a fresh impetus during phase II. “The Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union
    considers that last night Yanukovych’s regime openly positioned itself in confrontation to Ukraine’s
    civil society. The events of the last weeks have showed that the ruling regime has lost any link with
    the people, and they can remain in power after this last night only through the use of lies and
    violence.” (UHHRU 1.12.2013)
109 See e.g. the representation of the “march of the millions” on Dec 8, 2013: Claiming the resignation
    of the president gets discursively linked to the dismantling of the granite statue of Lenin, a sym-
    bolic gesture that underlines the refusal of Ukraine’s shared history with Russia and recalls the fall
    of Saddam Hussein’s statue in Baghdad in 2003 (KyivPost 13.12.2013: 4). Further historical compar-
    isons include the Orange Revolution (2004), Ukraine’s struggle for independence after the Fall of
184   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      this background, the conflict discourse not only circles around removing the authorities
      (president, government) or, in other words, around personal changes within the political
      system. It is also about a fundamental change of the political system based on a “change
      of people’s minds and their reality” (UkrN 9.12.2013). Hence, battles on the street about
      the control over public buildings (e.g. in form of civil disobedience, blocking of streets,
      occupation of buildings on one side and “robust” police operations on the other side) rep-
      resent more than just ritualistic cat-and-mouse games between protesters and security
      forces. Protagonists on all sides are characterised as being convinced about the authentic
      nature of this battle that is fought in a historic mission in the name of the whole country.
           In the course of this, contradictions of the concept of revolution itself come to light.
      Thereby, the articulated necessity of a revolutionary change of regime and political sys-
      tem or a “civilising breakthrough from Eurasia to Europe” (UkrN 12.12.2013) encounters
      the idea of revolution interpreted as “illegal seizure of power” that contradicts not only
      the rule of law and other democratic standards but also, ultimately, the “European way”
      (GovUkr 3.12.2013f). In sum, in phase II, a first normative shift lies in the fact that the
      state of conflict is no more collectively understood as a short-term phenomenon but as a
      genuine revolution including the ambition, or, from the opposite point of view, the threat
      of systemic change.110
           Escalating move C that could also be detected in phase II consists of a structural
      coupling between a subsystem of political communication that understands power and
      sovereignty to be primarily based on nation states and an overlapping subsystem of
      political communication dealing with power as a result of global spheres of influence,
      or, in other words, power dynamics in world society. While phase I is still marked by
      communication that attributes collectively binding decisions on existing contradictions
      to Ukrainian politics, phase II can be characterised by references including the idea
      that the real power over Ukraine’s future way lies beyond the traditional protagonists of
      Ukrainian politics, more precisely, in the global political sphere.
           In this context, many passages point out that certain protest strategies, especially
      concerning the blocking of state institutions, cannot be subsumed under democratic
      measures based on the European model (see e.g. GovUkr 3.12.2013c). Moreover, it is
      stated that Ukraine, at that time, is exposed to both western (i.e. European and/or
      American, e.g. concerning NATO111 ) and eastern (i.e. Russian) efforts of political inclu-
      sion. Accordingly, a more or less exclusive decision in favour of the one or other alliance
      is expected to have direct consequences on the global balance of power (see e.g. The
      Ukrainian Week 3.12.2013: 6). Against this background, (after having stopped the AA


            the Wall (1990/1991), the Velvet Revolution in former Chzechoslovakia (1989) and even the move-
            ment of 1968 (UkrN 9.12.2013, 12.12.2013). At the same time, however, the dangers of a head over
            heels revolution and “radical democracy” are addressed by referring to the “Bolshevik experience”
            (GovUkr 11.12.2013a).
      110   At this point, representatives of the political opposition parties, i.e. existing players within the for-
            mer political system, begin to articulate themselves as “representatives of civil society” (see also
            chapter 5.2/phase II).
      111   In this context, for example, civil society sources cite statements of NATO’s foreign ministers meet-
            ing. Therein, Ukraine is attributed an important role in international security and is thus promised
            to be supported as an ally in difficult times (see e.g. MMIC 5.12.2013a).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014         185

with the EU) opening negotiations about a new economic partnership between Russia
and Ukraine112 just the day new violence was collectively observed on Maidan (11 Dec)
induced a new perception: the power of organising and structuring the process does no
longer rest on Maidan, which is believed to be the embodiment of negotiating Ukraine’s
destiny, but now gets in danger of becoming a great power matter. At the same time, in
reference to the increasingly polarising mass protests either pro or anti-government,
the situation is discursively framed as a “point of no return”, while different sides not
only articulate their fear of losing security and stability but also, ultimately, of losing
the integrity of Ukraine as such and the ability to pull the strings.113 To sum up, it can be
stated that political communication here, i.e. communication about who is attributed
the power of shaping the further course of conflict, refers to two opponent sides that are
clearly associated with two opposed external forces.
    The structural coupling described above comes along with changing structures of ex-
pectation, or, in short, with a normative shift. Against the background of growing con-
tradictions (see overview below), conflict identities in the discourse increasingly show a
global benchmark. More precisely, roles are increasingly defined by positioning them-
selves in relation to a global balance of power that is perceived as getting out of balance.
In this sense, conflict identities consolidate: “Russophiles” versus “Europhiles”. Both are
mutually attributed to represent the majority whereas the respective counterpart only
represents a minority.114 Thereby, straight through the discourse, the question of gaining
and maintaining power is primarily interpreted within a winner-takes-it-all scenario.115
Hence, the polarisation between EuroMaidan protesters (perceived as agents of the West)
and president/ government supporters (perceived as agents of the East) gets more and
more manifest and comprehensive.
    Within the scope of already existing societal cleavages, persons and their roles now
become even more firmly associated with specific programmes in relation to the ongoing
conflict. Following this, based on the linguistic and geographic divide between Russian
speaking (eastern) parts of the population and Ukrainian speaking (central and west-
ern) parts, the former are portrayed as supporting a pro-Russian orientation of Ukraine
whereas the latter are presented as supporting a western pro-European orientation.116

112   According to media reports and respective government reactions, this partnership was prepared
      days before (and concluded on Dec 17, which marks the end of phase II): “Unfortunately, today in
      the media, in speeches of opposition politicians, there are distributed openly false information
      and provocative assessments about the content of the meeting of heads of the States of Russia
      and Ukraine that took place in Sochi yesterday.” (GovUkr 7.12.2013a)
113   Both in government and in civil society sources, the intention to prevent a state of emergency,
      which is associated with an economic collapse and some sort of external takeover, is present (see
      e.g. MMIC 16.12.2013a; GovUkr 18.12.2013a).
114   To illustrate this point see exemplarily The Ukrainian Week (3.12.2013: 11) or GovUkr (13.12.2013b).
115   Picking up the widespread “sink or swim interpretation” of the situation, the KyivPost (6.12.2013:
      3), for example, states: “The two sides are becoming increasingly entrenched in their positions and
      in a very high stakes game where the room for compromise is narrowing.”
116   See government reports on the provenance and quantity of protesters in Kiev, which were also pub-
      lished by civil society actors and the media: “Today, the number of guests from Ukraine’s regions
      on the streets of the capital was unprecedented. Independence Square was filled with Ukrainian-
      speaking westerners: people who have travelled to Kyiv from Lviv, Ternopil, Ivano-Frankivsk, and
186   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      In line with this, the younger generation, by a majority, is supposed to fight for western
      ideas of democracy whereas the older generations are represented as being defenders of
      an autocratic system based on reactionary Soviet values. Accordingly, the divide between
      the power holders and their beneficiaries and those being excluded from the political,
      economic and cultural elite is portrayed as quasi absolute (see e.g. KyivPost 13.12.2013:
      4). Therefore, the normative shift is constituted by the fact that the existing multitude of
      motivations and interests among protesters on Maidan and even within the pro-govern-
      ment fraction gets more and more transformed into a simplified set of two adversaries,
      i.e. two discursively formed and closed conflict identities, which correspond to two main
      global spheres of influence Ukraine is seen to be exposed to.
           In sum, in phase II, both escalating moves (B, C) represent manifestations of the ob-
      served contradictions in the discourse. With that said, the differentiation of the conflict
      system’s dimensions of meaning advances (see overview below117 ):



      Table 14: Dimensions of the conflict system/phase I+II

        Dimension         Phase       Poles of Contradiction
                                      commitment to na-                         obligation to respect inter-
                                      tional law and order,                     national legal frameworks,
                                      national security, law                    especially human rights
                                      enforcement
                                      revolution as illegal act,                revolution as positive
                                      source of instability                     change of system, social
                          II
                                                                                progress
                                      national political                        political decision-making as
        factual                                                    versus
                                      decision-making as                        part of exclusively national
                                      consequence of changes                    affairs
                                      in global balance of
                                      power
                                      deepening relations                       explicitly orienting Ukraine
                                      with Russia                               towards Europe
                          I
                                      conforming to (binary)                    national emancipation and
                                      geopolitical condition                    independence




            smaller cities in the west of the country to support the Euromaidan. Meanwhile, just outside the
            barricades, groups of Russian-speaking young men from Donetsk, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhzhia
            and other eastern cities roamed the streets, often making fun of the Euromaidan slogans.” (MMIC
            15.12.2013a; see also KyivPost 6.12.2013: 1; MMIC 14.12.2013)
      117   Phase I’s overview was taken over for the one of phase II; so it is done for the following charts.
            Newer entries can be found at the top of each dimension’s culumns in bold (see the respective
            Roman numeral for the phase).
           Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014       187


  Dimension           Phase      Poles of Contradiction
                                 Maidan protests as                        EuroMaidan as world-his-
                      II         follow-up of historical                   torical mission of freedom
                                 extremisms
  temporal                       Orange Revolution as                      EuroMaidan as necessary
                                 historical failure and                    follow-up of Orange Revolu-
                      I
                                 source of long term                       tion
                                 instability
                                                             versus
                                 allocation of political                   allocation of political power
                                 power as winner-takes-                    as parallel representation of
                      II         it-all scenario                           different ideas and interests
  social                         societal cleavages as                     society as integration of
                                 source of danger                          continuing differences
                                 post-Soviet elites                        (newly developing) civil
                      I
                                                                           society

(Own table)



     Within the context of these developing multidimensional contradictions, observa-
tions referring to violence become increasingly common in the conflict discourse. Even
though violence of security forces against protestors on Nov 30/Dec 1, which has been ob-
served for the first time, is portrayed as deliberate and concerted in some spontaneous
commentaries, there is a range of accounts suggesting that all sides, to are certain ex-
tent, were taken by surprise by this kind of violence. At the same time, the violent events
in question can be seen as structurally formative: the process of conflict identity forma-
tion in phase II clearly refers to this “precedential case”. In this way, the programme of
one side (persons who are attributed to the roles of office holders, Russophiles, eastern-
ers, older generations etc.) consists of defending the status quo, which is perceived as a
legal and legitimate distribution of political decision-making power. Moreover, this side
gets increasingly convinced that revolutions can be equated with illegal actions leading to
long term instability and insecurity. From this point of view, to maintain or produce pub-
lic order, it is both legally and morally required to enforce law and order by force against
those who threaten it.118
     In contrast, the programme of the other side (persons who are attributed to the roles
of civil society campaigners, pro-European activists etc.) develops from activating civil
society as a political actor of change into something different: Now, political actions of



118   See exemplarily KyivPost (6.12.2013: 4): In reaction to the accusation of having executed dispropor-
      tionate use of force against protesters, government officials blame “provocateurs for everything
      from the disorder that led to the police crackdown on Nov 30 to the violence during the Dec 1
      demonstrations to the subsequent takeover of Kyiv City Hall. Azarov [the Prime Minister] throws
      the word around as if calling something ‘a provocation’ entitles the authorities to do whatever they
      want.”
188   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      the government and physical measures of security forces are assessed as illegal and il-
      legitimate assaults119 , which have to be countered by resistance and defence including
      physical violence, such as blocking of streets, occupation of buildings, damage to prop-
      erties and civil disobedience against security forces. Hence, increasingly closed conflict
      identities go hand in hand with a beginning legitimisation of violence in the discourse,
      which includes more and more confrontational elements, such as the threat of violence
      or the characterisation of the situation as a “war” (italics added):

            “We stretch out our hand. If we find a fist, I say frankly – we have enough forces.”
            (Prime Minister Mykola Azarov, GovUkr 3.12.2013e)

            “About the stand-off scenario: This war of attrition is one that the regime will
            lose.” (MMIC 9.12.2013)

      Indeed, increasing references to violence in the discourse are intimately linked to the
      observation of physical violence between protestors and security forces, which comes on
      the heels, as the incidences of Dec 11 show. As the analysis of the text corpus in phase II
      suggests, using and facing violent means has become a part of the collective structure of
      expectation. Thus, from both sides, further violent clashes are estimated as being likely
      or even inevitable.120 Furthermore, against the background of an ongoing and already
      mixed-up economic and legal conflict narrative121 , the conclusion of a new deal between
      Russia and Ukraine that seems to create a fait accompli regarding Ukraine’s orientation
      in the global political environment encounters the presence of the more than just hypo-
      thetical violence option in the discourse.




      119 In this context, the observation of irregularities (e.g. vote buying) during the parliamentary
          by-elections on December 15 when 4 of 5 seats were won by Yanucovych allies and the suspen-
          sion of any cooperation talks on the part of the European Commission as well play an important
          role in the discourse (see exemplarily MMIC 17.12.2013b).
      120 The following passages (coded as pointers of “increasing confrontation” and “use of force”) are ex-
          emplary: “We condemn all acts of provocation, which pose a threat to life and health.” (GovUkr
          16.12.2013e). “[This is] a sign of extreme danger. On the one hand, there are thousands of politi-
          cal tourists in Ukraine’s capital – some here voluntarily, to make a statement; others bussed in by
          Ukraine’s political parties. On the other hand, the Ministry of the Interior has mobilized its forces
          (regular police, crowd control troops, “Berkut” riot-police) throughout the country and has brought
          all possible manpower to the capital. The situation is tense […] the inevitable: a bloody crackdown.
          […] A crackdown on the current protests will inevitably only result in more demonstrators descend-
          ing on Kyiv. Indeed, each time the regime has resorted to violence during the past few weeks, the
          scale of civil disobedience has expanded.” (MMIC 15.12.2013a)
      121 Key points of this ongoing narrative in phase II include: the possible negative impact of a reduction
          in exports to Russia, particularly on the state budget and on the nation’s political stability in gen-
          eral (GovUkr 4.12.2014a; GovUkr 11.12.2013a); the qualification of Ukraine’s economic system as a
          deepening “crony capitalism” (see KyivPost 13.12.2013: 4); (il)legal actions of security forces as pro-
          tectors of law and order and political/economic stability (GovUkr 7.12.2013c); considerations about
          constitutional ways of inducing the president’s resignation against the background of breaches
          both in political and economic affairs (MMIC 9.12.2013; KyivPost 13.12.2013: 4).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          189

5.5.3 From Deals to Laws (Phase III, Dec 17 – Jan 16)

In due consideration of all insights into the communicative expansion of the conflict dis-
course so far, in phase III, one escalating move (D) was brought to light by the examina-
tion of the text corpus. It consists of a structural coupling that develops between two
political subsystems of communication that are already linked up to the conflict system:
one focuses on the traditional roles in a national political framework. In this context, the
guiding distinction is the one between government and political opposition parties, or, in
other words, between power holders and those challenging their position as institutional
counterparts. As it has been made obvious by the analysis of phase I and II, EuroMaidan,
right from the start, has been interpreted as a challenge of the government by political
opposition parties who are imputed to initiate and control the protests as a campaign to
seize power.122 For this reason, the fact that there was a non-partisan civil society artic-
ulating its ambitions to participate in shaping Ukraine’s future has been a blind spot in
large parts of the government’s and media’s observations.
     However, this political subsystem of communication, which assumes a simplified
role allocation of office holders versus their direct challengers and processes power as the
ability to take collectively binding decisions now gets combined with a different subsys-
tem of political communication. In this regard, as outlined earlier in reference to world
societal communicative systems, political power gets further addressed not only as the
ability to generate followers by taking formal decisions but, beyond that, the ability to
communicate in an enduring and binding manner and with a certain impact on the big
picture.123 This can be illustrated with the example of the “national roundtable” that was
initiated during phase II and continues in phase III: In the light of intensifying protests,
all “political forces”, defined as government, political parties and representatives of Eu-
roMaidan were invited to join the roundtable in order to find a way towards dialogue and
compromise. Even though there are discursive references highlighting the autonomy of
the participants, especially concerning the independence between EuroMaidan repre-
sentatives and political parties, the roundtable brings the analytical observation that po-
litical communication about how to organise Ukraine’s future extends its range and, at
this point, obviously includes and values civil society actors as a relevant societal address
for the first time. In this sense, the roundtable represents a burning glass of the conflict
discourse, where two perspectives of political communication get translatable and un-
derstandable or, in other words, structurally coupled: One side orients itself towards an
idea of power based on the interplay of, in the narrower sense, political actors and their
counterparts within the framework of state institutions; the other side attributes the po-
tential of political impact, in principle, to a broad range of societal roles influencing the
political process at times.


122   On this, see an exemplary statement of Prime Minister Azarov (GovUkr 20.12.2013b): “Our largest
      problem is not that we don’t prepare relevant draft laws, but that we have a peculiar opposition
      who [sic] prefer most construction of barricades in the center of Kyiv instead of work in the Parlia-
      ment.”
123   See particularly Albert and Steinmetz (2007: 20–27) and chapter 3.2 for detailed considerations
      about “the political” in world society.
190   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

           Based on that, in phase III, the structural coupling between both subsystems of po-
      litical communication passes through the next step of development. Although political
      communication still shows both above-mentioned modes of observation, it gets again
      more and more marked by a tendency to subsume any communication under the sim-
      plified guiding distinction of two roles: pro-government (i.e. the actual power holders)
      versus all the others (i.e. institutional challengers of the power holders).124 This also mir-
      rors in a normative shift, which is part of a further consolidation of conflict identities.
      More precisely, phase III’s normative shift is about an increasing elimination of diver-
      sity: On the one hand, the multiplicity of objectives, ideas, interests, currents, fractions
      etc. that came up with the broad diversity of Maidan protesters is understood as an as-
      set or even as the true force of the protest movement: As its high level of communicative
      connectivity shows, EuroMaidan is indeed seen as a inclusive cross cleavage shelter of
      oppositional forces.
           On the other hand, against the background of a growing dualist polarisation in
      conflict development, the value of diversity noticeably disappears in favour of an idea
      of strength through unity, on both sides. Seen from this angle, phase III can also be
      interpreted as a phase of alliance building.125 At its beginning, the “Russia-Ukraine-
      deal” – an agreement, which is not only referred to as a compilation of interstate co-
      operation projects but also as a binding document aiming at establishing irreversible
      unity in a wide range of long-term political questions concerning economy and security
      matters.126 Later on in phase III, a similar process can be observed on the “other side”:


      124 On both discursive working levels, this dichotomy gets more and more anchored, particularly in-
          cluding the insinuation that opposition parties are directly cooperating with the Maidan protesters
          in order to subvert predetermined democratic processes. In this context, as Yanucovych person-
          ally states, the only legal chance of the opposition parties “to challenge his authority is sched-
          uled for 2015, when the presidential elections take place” (president Yanucovych, cited in KyivPost
          20.12.2013: 2). This addressing resonates in the discourse, as statements from within the ranks of
          Maidan protesters show that the juxtaposition of EuroMaidan plus political opposition parties (as
          union) versus government is picked up. In this sense, for example, the conditions for a transition
          of power “by the power of the people” are discussed in terms of organisational capacity and frag-
          mentation of both sides (see exemplarily UkrN 26.12.2013). The media, in the same vein, reproduce
          the two-sides-scenario by referring to the opposition’s key challenges: the mounting of a success-
          ful international lobbying campaign (a stated and ongoing objective of EuroMaidan) and, at the
          same time, the courtship to win political support via elections (an obvious objective of the political
          opposition parties in the light of the flopped by-elections on December 15 (KyivPost 20.12.2013: 4).
      125 Following the alliances idea, it can be stated (e.g. according to an IR-neorealist interpretation)
          that the newly established “internal” alliance between political opposition parties and EuroMaidan
          protesters constitutes a reaction to the “external” alliance in form of the Russia-Ukraine-deal con-
          cluded shortly before (see chapter 5.2/Phase III).
      126 See e.g. The Ukrainian Week (23.12.2013: 4). As it became apparent, in the aftermath of the “Russia-
          Ukraine-deal”, different ideas, opinions and plans that indeed existed among the government sup-
          porters (see exemplarily differentiation between the “hawks” and “doves” roles above) are increas-
          ingly hard to find in the text corpus. Instead, a growing number of statements suggest that roles
          change and persons switch sides respectively. See exemplarily Rinat Akhmetov’s (an “oligarch”
          loyal to the government up to that point) statement on the Maidan protests (MMIC 17.12.2013c):
          “The fact that peaceful people went to peaceful protests shows that Ukraine is a free, democratic
          country. No one will take Ukraine from that path.”
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014          191

In late December, it not only becomes apparent that political opposition parties and
EuroMaidan representatives forge a new alliance, which has been declared unpreferred
hitherto. Also, according to the analysed statements, the future of EuroMaidan is dis-
cursively linked to the idea of including the political opposition parties and forming
a nationwide platform that provides an alternative political structure. Referred to as
“All-Ukraine EuroMaidan Forum” (see chapter 5.2./ phase III), communication, at this
point, indeed starts to circle around this new hot spot of ideas, interests, strategies and,
therefore, to form a new political authority.
     The formation of these new alliances in phase III takes place against a discursive
background that gradually develops and can be characterised as a collective percep-
tion of political, economic, and social uncertainty and instability.127 The widely shared
feeling of being confronted with an unfair counterpart, both from a government and
a Maidan protesters perspective, thus reinforces the impression of closing conflict
identities. Thereby, persons get ascribed to increasingly distinct roles while respective
programmes get simplified: On the one hand, people from a diversified range of civil so-
ciety initiatives protesting on Maidan get summarily addressed as a single and coherent
political force (i.e. role) pursuing a quite simple plan: seizing power (i.e. programme).
On the other hand, persons more or less loosely associated with the government up to
that point (i.e. government members, Party of Regions members and voters, security
forces and other civil servants) are seen as unambiguous supporters of Yanucovych and
all government actions (i.e. role) pursuing a quite simple plan, too: staying in power at
all costs (i.e. programme).128 As the analysis of the text corpus reveals, the instigation to
speak up with one voice and thus to boost the respective group’s unity (at the expense
of its inner diversity) frequently appears in the discourse. So, picking up the hawks and
doves metaphor, for example, governments statements invoke the unity of the country
behind a legitimate, strong and caring government (see e.g. GovUkr 31.12.2013a; GovUkr
16.01.2014h). Statements from Maidan, too, place special emphasis on the extraordinary


127   In this context, according to government statements, the Russia-Ukraine-deal was indispensable
      to end “the sell-out of the nation’s interests” and to stop the present economic and political insta-
      bility “other political forces” are responsible for (GovUkr 18.12.2013a/b). One source of uncertainty
      on civil society’s side (apart from the government’s unpredictability) forges ahead in reference to
      the western support showing “many political and cultural shortcomings” and being perceived as
      vague and insufficient since the EU does not clearly distance itself from Yanucovych and prefers
      to think about possible “win-win-Situations” (MMIC 18.12.2013b). Uncertainty was also expressed
      in media statements underlining the observed differences between EuroMaidan and the Orange
      Revolution: “The confrontation looks much like a re-run of the Orange Revolution of 2004 – only
      this time there seem to be no credible opposition leaders, no clear strategy by the demonstrators
      and no easy solution to Ukraine’s long-term problems. […] The big worry is that whoever takes
      over, Ukraine will continue to be caught between Russia and the EU, and the country will remain
      internally divided and without strong leadership.” (The Ukrainian Week 23.12.2013: 18–19)
128   On this, the following passages are exemplary: Based on government documents in phase III,
      Maidan is presented as producing one-sided and biased “information noise” while the protests
      would only represent “a fragment on the map of the country” (GovUkr 25.12.2013a). In contrast,
      according to the Ukrainian Helsinki Human Rights Union, the government and its supporters are
      seen as part of a “clannish and oligarchic” system depriving the people of “freedom, national dig-
      nity and constitutional rights” (UHHRU 27.12.2013).
192   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      solidarity within the protest movement and the idea that “the collective body dominates
      over the individual” (MMIC 4.01.2014a).129 With regard to this increasingly oversim-
      plified representation of the conflict as a confrontation of two conflict parties, a self-
      reinforcing character of communication can be noted.
           To sum up, it is stated that the poles of the discourse’s contradictions further develop
      and thus widen the field in which escalating move D emerges. Linked to the conflict sys-
      tem’s dimensions of meaning, this can be represented as follows (see following overview;
      further elucidations below):



      Table 15: Dimensions of the conflict system/phase I+II+III

        Dimension         Phase       Poles of Contradiction
                                      civil society commitment                 civil society activities as
                                      with the objective to                    part of a profound and
                                      remove power holders                     self-determined societal
                                                                               transformation
                          III         civil disobedience and                   blocking of public insti-
                                      blockings as subversion                  tutions and services as
                                      of state authority and at-               legitimate democratic in-
                                      tack against sovereignty                 struments of protest130


                                      commitment to national                   obligation to respect inter-
        factual                                                    versus
                                      law and order, national                  national legal frameworks,
                                      security, law enforce-                   especially human rights
                                      ment
                                      revolution as illegal act,               revolution as positive
                          II          source of instability                    change of system, social
                                                                               progress
                                      national political                       political decision-making as
                                      decision-making as con-                  part of exclusively national
                                      sequence of changes in                   affairs
                                      global balance of power




      129 Though, at this point, the publication of a new poll paints a finer picture of what is supposed to
          be an indicator of conflict identities (DIF 27.12.2013): 48 percent of Ukrainians would vote for EU
          association in a referendum; 36 percent would vote against EU association; at the same time, 47
          percent are in favour of the Russia-Ukraine-deal and 28 percent are critical of this agreement. In
          addition, as for example statements from EuroMaidan supporters reveal, protests continue to os-
          cillate between emotionally nationalistic elements (singing of national anthem, nationalistic mot-
          tos, domination of the colours of the national flag), “liberal” elements (slogans promoting ideas
          of human rights and democracy, European flags) and the vanishing of national and social barriers
          (integration of Crimean Tatars, liberal Jewish and Russian intellectuals as well as business people
          and “oligarchs”) (MMIC 4.01.2014a).
      130 For an overview on protests means and methods of different protest groups on Maidan see
          again chapter 5.4/figure “Overview on Factions/Subgroups on Maidan in mid-February”/column
          on “Method”.
           Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   193


 Dimension            Phase      Poles of Contradiction
                                 deepening relations with                explicitly orienting Ukraine
                                 Russia                                  towards Europe
 factual              I
                                 conforming to (binary)                  national emancipation and
                                 geopolitical condition                  independence
                                 “restauration” of good                  overcoming the west-east-
                                 old (and broadly based)                 division of Ukraine; resist
                                 partnership with Russia                 Russian domination in
                      III                                                “Ukrainian Arab Spring”
                                 working towards pros-                   remembering the dark side
                                 perous future alongside                 of the Russian past
                                 Russia
 temporal
                                 Maidan protests as                      EuroMaidan as world-his-
                      II         follow-up of historical                 torical mission of freedom
                                 extremisms
                                                               versus
                                 Orange Revolution as                    EuroMaidan as necessary
                                 historical failure and                  follow-up of Orange Revo-
                      I
                                 source of long-term                     lution
                                 instability
                                 reinventing the political               working with/ within the
                      III        in an “identity revolution”             existing political structures
                                                                         and culture
                                 allocation of political                 allocation of political power
                                 power as winner-takes-                  as parallel representation of
 social                          it-all scenario                         different ideas and interests
                      II
                                 societal cleavages as                   society as integration of
                                 source of danger                        continuing differences
                                 post-Soviet elites                      (newly developing) civil
                      I
                                                                         society

(Own table)



    Considering the foregoing remarks (on escalating move D, its world societal refer-
ences, the strengthening of conflict identities against the background of the discourse’s
poles of contradiction), the discursive processing of violence can be illustrated on the ba-
sis of the following two spots: Firstly, at the beginning of phase III, the analysis conveys
an impression of how violence becomes a focal point of discursive contestation. Taking
the law on the amnesty of detained Maidan protesters, which was adopted by the gov-
ernment majority in parliament at the beginning of phase III, as an example: As outlined
above, this law was not only meant to grant amnesty for detained Maidan protesters from
civil society but also for those members of the police and security forces that had been
accused of disproportionate use of force against protesters on Nov 30 and Dec 11. Based
on the analysis of the text corpus, this was perceived as if all participants, i.e. security
194   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      forces and protesters, had resorted to violence in the same disproportionate way. As a re-
      sult, the political opposition parties decided to quit the round table talks. In this way, the
      equal treatment of police violence and protest actions provokes a range of statements on
      how the state monopoly on violence should be implemented or limited. Therefore, at this
      point, the conflict discourse corresponds to an intensifying negotiation process: subver-
      sion of state authority vs. protest as a kind of democratic right of resistance.
           The spectrum of this negotiation process and its consequences can be illustrated by
      means of two example threads within the discourse: Tetyana Chornovol, opposition ac-
      tivist and journalist, who was assaulted after having published a critical article (see also
      chapter 5.2/phase III), becomes a much-cited example case of illegitimate state violence.
      The Chernovol case thus provides a defining moment that deeply shapes structures of
      expectation in the discourse on violence: at that point, the protests again pick up pace
      since more and more people realise that they could easily find themselves in a similar
      situation. A second example thread deals with the Holodomor, the Ukrainian “genocide
      by hunger” of 1932/1933 (see also chapter 5.3). References to this crucial historical trauma
      in Ukraine’s Soviet times now get discursively linked to a refusal of the Russia-Ukraine-
      deal. According to respective statements, now, under the watchful eyes of global public,
      the time has come “to define the own, independent space” and “to control the own des-
      tiny” (MMIC 23.12.2013c) in order to prevent new dependencies that may bring back a
      situation in which people are exposed to extreme state-sponsored violence, such as eth-
      nic cleansing or genocide.
           Secondly, overlooking the repeated observation and discursive reproduction of phys-
      ical violence in the conflict system so far, communication further on draws on martial
      or even war-like vocabulary: At the beginning of phase III already, civil society sources
      speak of “legions of riot police, dismantling barricades, clashing with protesters and try-
      ing to take back the occupied City Hall”, whereas “the centre of Kiev looks like a war camp
      […] bracing for the another crackdown.” (MMIC 18.12.2013a). Other statements from in-
      ternational organisation picked up in civil society publications refer to Maidan as the
      “frontline of liberal democracy” that compels any observer to adopt party, of course with-
      out being able to forsee which side will carry off the victory (MMIC 18.12.2013b).131 Voices
      from the media and INGOs take the same line when characterising the incidences on Nov
      30 and Dec 11 as “blood shed” (UHHRU 27.12.2013), declaring an eventual orientation to
      the east as an “existential threat” or stating that for Russia, having lost the Cold War, “no
      price is too high to keep Ukraine in Russia’s orbit” (The Ukrainian Week 23.12.2013: 23).
           To sum up this overview on phase III, it can be stated that the discourse circles around
      the interpretation of the conflict’s status and the legitimacy of roles and means of the still
      evolving conflict identities. In this context, the text corpus exhibits a number of passages
      that existentialise the situation, for example by qualifying the conflict as a “fight for the
      very soul of Ukraine” (MMIC 24.12.2013a). Thereby, protagonists from civil society are at-
      tributed the mission of “totally legitimising and finalising an identity revolution” (MMIC



      131   This once again recalls the maelstrom metaphor according to which, sooner or later, a conflict
            forces its environment to take some kind of (communicative) stance towards the conflict (see chap-
            ter 4.3).
          Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014        195

1.01.2014) that has already catched a majority of Ukrainians’ hearts and minds.132 In reac-
tion, passages from government sources downplay the severity of the conflict by blaming
“opposition actuators for artificial tension in society and public incitement to unlawful
acts” (GovUkr 13.01.2014d; italics added). Hence, the protest movement which was initi-
ated by civil society actors is not only denied to raise its voice in the political process but
also its legitimsation as a relevant societal factor as such (KyivPost 17.01.2014: 5). In this
sense, the much-cited words of Prime Minister Azarov,

      “There is no social conflict in Ukraine, there is artificial political confrontation.”
      (GovUkr 15.01.2014c),

make not only clear that the Maidan protests, lasting for more than six weeks at that time,
lack any kind of substance and basis. Also, according to government sources, in view of
the violent experiences so far, “illegal and immoral actions” in the context of the protests
(civil disobedience, blockings, strikes etc.) have broken the destiny of many people and
“can still break the destiny of many others” (GovUkr 15.01.2014a; 16.01.2014h).
     While passing over to the last phase, phase IV, references to the system of law get
new conciseness within the conflict discourse. In this context, the alliance between civil
society actors and the political opposition upholds their longstanding demands: the or-
derly punishment of those who are responsible for the disproportionate use of violence
towards protesters, including the dismissal of the Interior Minister and the resignation
of the president (see e.g. KyivPost 17.01.2014: 2). These demands are flanked by the politi-
cal opposition’s blocking of the parliament by absence, which is presented as a legitimate
constitutional right (see chapter 5.2/phase III). In turn, government statements under-
line a self-understanding that refers to a distinct concept of the state of law: the pres-
ident and the government embody the authority and sovereignty of the state and thus
represent the entirety of the citizens. Against this background, any threat to the very ex-
istence of the state – that is how the opposition’s absence in parliament and the Maidan
protests in general are repeatedly classified in these sources – must be fought off by all
available means. From this perspective, it is logically consistent to drive forth legal regu-
lations limiting the citizens’ liberties and legalising repressive measures. This marks the
beginning of phase IV, when the “anti-protest laws” were adopted.

5.5.4 Breakup Right on the Doorstep (Phase IV, Jan 16 – Feb 22)

At the beginning of phase IV, there is a number of references to the legislative package
officially called “Procedural Laws on Additional Measures for Protecting Security of the


132    In this context, some statements reflect on the very mental nature of the ongoing identity revo-
       lution. Therefore, the identity revolution is characterised as being way more than a mere political
       revolution leading to a removal of the power holders. Rather, it is presented as a fundamental
       collective transformation of Ukrainians who, by this process, get the chance to become new po-
       litical citizens (MMIC 1.01.2014) against the background of a European geopolitical reality (MMIC
       4.01.2014a). Media statements, too, pick up the idea of an ongoing societal transformation where-
       upon EuroMaidan “has captured the attention of the world and returned a feeling of pride to many
       Ukrainians.” (KyivPost 17.01.2014: 2).
196   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      Citizens”, which gets immediately and pointedly dubbed “anti-protest laws” in civil soci-
      ety and political opposition sources and “anti-extremist laws” in government statements
      respectively. Exemplarily, with a view to opposition parties boycotting the parliament,
      there is talk of those who “continue to work against Ukraine” (GovUkr 15.01.2014a). On
      the other hand, those government officials and supporters who promote the law package
      are accused of “suspending fundamental constitutional rights” and of installing an “ab-
      solute mandate to arbitrarily crack down on justice, the press, NGOs and citizens” which
      leads Ukraine into a “perfect dictatorial regime” (UkrN 17.01.2014).
          Overlooking phase IV, two escalating moves could be identified. First, escalating
      move E stands for a marked change in view of political and medial communication
      since both get linked up in a new quality.133 As statements from the text corpus show,
      mass media communication gets increasingly referred to under political, i.e. power-
      related auspices. Already in phase III and particularly in the course of phase IV, there is a
      range of references suggesting that conflict parties’ communication veritably coopts the
      media. Both in government and civil society sources reciprocal accusations can be found
      implying that the conflict is fuelled by purposeful disinformation.134 In this context, it
      is demonstrated that one of the key political modes of observation, i.e. the distinction
      and indication of power holders and their respective counterparts, not only finds its
      neutral expression in media communication. Also, through the way of reporting, the
      analysed media favour a specific reading of the situation and thus affect the perceived
      distribution of power in conflict. In this context, for example, media coverage not only
      immediately adopts a colloquial and provoking expression – “anti-protest laws” – but
      also, on its own terms, suggests interpreting the law package as a “serious attack on
      human rights in Ukraine” and thus as illegitimate (see KyivPost 17.01.2014: 4). On this,
      government statements make reference by accusing the media of engaging in dema-
      goguery by fuelling fears and instrumentalising people (see GovUkr 20.02.2014a). Seen
      from the perspective of mass media, in turn, it can be stated here that political com-
      munication increasingly addresses the subsystem of mass media and actors attributed
      to it. The case of Tetyana Chornovol again is exemplary (see chapter 5.2./phase III): a
      journalist gets addressed (in this case assaulted) as a political activist at the same time.
      In the same way, media companies and institutions get hacked, taken over or even
      closed (see MMIC 31.12.2013b). In other words, the ultimate communication of political
      power, i.e. repressive violence, is not only observed and articulated by the media but also
      gets fully “translated” into and understandable as conflict communication within the
      subsystem of mass media itself when certain persons and their roles, such as journalists


      133   At this point, it is recalled that mass media communication, as it was introduced within the context
            of the methodological considerations above, already constitutes a part of the conflict discourse
            and thus of the conflict system, since communication from politics and mass media is naturally
            and permanently coupled (see particularly chapter 4.2).
      134   To give two striking examples: Voices from the government complain about the medial reception
            of a working visit of the Ukrainian and Russian head of government according to which the condi-
            tions of an alleged Moscow-induced accession of Ukraine to the CU were determined (see GovUkr
            24.12.2013b); in the same way, accounts from the civil society section complain about allegations
            from the government’s side including the idea that the EU allegedly insists on introducing same-
            sex marriages as a precondition for the AA (see MMIC 15.12.2013a).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014       197

and reporters working for media companies, get attributed to a specific side of the
conflict (i.e. the anti-government camp) by force.
     With this, a normative shift – the second pillar of escalating move E – takes place and
further affects the consolidation of conflict identities in phase IV. In view of the above-
mentioned identity layers, it can be stated that relevant persons and their roles, partic-
ularly those associated with the media change their programme: While, in preceding
conflict phases, the analysed mass media communication suggests that media players
have been observed and have been observing themselves as a rather neutral ‘third party’
claiming to focus on information of common news value, the perception of the media in
phase IV changes. Now, based on (self-) ascriptions in the conflict discourse, media rep-
resentatives become ultimately observed as acting entities within the conflict system.135
This ultimately cements a virulent normative claim within the conflict system that can be
reduced to the following message that not only addresses mass media but also, in princi-
ple, the whole conflict environment: Whoever comments on the conflict finds oneself in
a situation in which the expectation to take one conflict party’s side is perceived as very
strong.
     Escalating move F, the last one that could be identified in the investigation period,
is composed of a structural coupling that brings political and legal communication to a
different level. Thereby, the new connecting link between the two lies in a changing ob-
servation of violence. Building on legal communication, it can be stated that there is a
newly established national legal basis (either understood as “anti-protest laws” or “anti-
extremist laws”, depending on the conflict party), which legalises and legitimises a large-
scale use of force, even retroactively, as for example the dispute about the regulations
on amnesty for both security forces and protesters shows. At the same time, there is an
internationalised human rights discourse referred to by insinuating that the violation
of human rights in Ukraine justifies a veritable political revolution whereby the use of
force cannot be fully excluded.136 So, both legal strands from the conflict discourse show
that the increasing use of force has become compatible within the inner logic of the le-
gal system of communication itself.137 These considerations, in turn, match with political


135   As the analysis of media coverage shows, particularly from February 2014 on, reports are increas-
      ingly marked by referring to the government in a way that positions the media itself in opposition
      to an all too Russian-friendly government. In this sense, (negative) commentaries more and more
      supersede reports on government action. In KyivPost (7.02.2014: 4), for example, Yanukovych’s ad-
      ministration is openly accused of “working in tandem with the Kremlin propaganda”, of spreading
      rumours (e.g. on armed militants trained on the territory of the US embassy), and of “discrediting
      and smearing EuroMaidan protestors”. Moreover, the government is characterised as “incompetent
      and malicious”.
136   This becomes particularly apparent within the context of the “All-Ukraine Euromaidan Forum”
      where the recognition of human rights was declared as “fundamentally important for the further
      development of the Ukrainian society” (MMIC 21.01.2014a; see chapter 5.2/phase III). Furthermore,
      statements from civil society make clear that Ukraine is in a “battle for regime/system change”,
      which, against the background of everyday mass violence, is first and foremost about Ukrainian’s
      dignity and, at this point, radicalises (MMIC 20.01.2014a).
137   In this sense, on the one hand, a number of passages suggest that the alleged injustice committed
      by the regime (e.g. concerning corruption, abstraction of funds, wilful misrepresentation concern-
      ing the AA plans, culminating in plans of a coup d’état by re-joining the Russian Federation) jus-
198   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      communication, which also circles around observing and describing a new quality of vi-
      olence in conflict. Here, shaping laws that legalise and thus normalise the use of force
      is regarded as means to maintain the political status quo, i.e. the position of the power
      holders. This entails deeply structuring effects on expectations within the conflict sys-
      tem. Thereby, the intensified use of force, formally backed up by the new law package,
      evolves into a kind of everybody’s means of choice – be it to assert (see government) or
      challenge (see civil society) political power claims. In other words, the collective observa-
      tion of the (excessive) use of force serves as a common discursive target corridor, where
      political and legal communication, once again, get translatable for each other on a new
      level.
           The structural coupling outlined above comes along with a last and crucial norma-
      tive shift of the conflict discourse. In essence, this shift is about entrenching conflict
      identities between which persons, roles and programmes are unambiguously attributed.
      Based on the text corpus, the relationship between the conflict parties, i.e. between pro-
      and anti-government activists, is characterised by reciprocal contempt. For both con-
      flict parties, the use of organised collective violence seems to remain the only means to
      ultimately communicate political power claims. This is the result of a discursive devel-
      opment whereby, in the present and last decisive step of conflict escalation, adversaries
      become enemies that are determined to fight each other with all means at hand. In this
      context, there is significant discursive evidence within the discursive characterisations
      of the other from both sides’ perspectives that can be read as legitimisation of imminent
      and unequivocal actions, including the use of force in a less restricted way (see table 16).



      Table 16: Common normative reference frames

        government source                common normative reference             civil society source
                                         frame (selected key points)
        protest leaders are “crim-                                              “president is accountable for
        inal”, “immoral”, “inciting                                             bloodshed” and a situation
                                                adversaries as
        vengeance”, “fuelling hatred”,                                          “on the brink of civil war”,
                                         →      criminals to be held     ←
        “losing control”, causing                                               “violation of constitution”
                                                accountable
        “chain reaction of aggression”                                          (UkrN 22.01.2014c)
        (UkrN 20.01.2014b138 )




            tifies resistance by force (UkrN 20.01.2014c). On the other hand, other sources bring forward that
            Ukraine’s critical situation (public buildings blocked, security forces threatened by protesters us-
            ing Molotov cocktails etc.) was invoked by the Maidan protests. This is seen as a serious breach of
            law or even as coup d’etat, too, which has to be averted by all available means (GovUkr 22.01.2014a;
            GovUkr 23.01.2014e).
      138   Nota bene: Even though UkrN 20.01.2018b refers to a statement attributed to the “Party of Re-
            gions”, i.e. the governing party of president Yanucovych, it was (re-) published within the context
            of civil society oppositions’ volunteer community resources.
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014       199


 government source                 common normative reference            civil society source
                                   frame (selected key points)
 protesters are “ruthless and                                            “undeclared war against rev-
                                         the other: carrying
 violent revolutionaries”;                                               olution of the younger gen-
                                         out illegitimate and
 “insane and unrestrained                                                eration”, e.g. by “forced dis-
                                         illegal actions
 supporters attacking security                                           appearance”, “death squads”;
                                   →                              ←
 forces”; “extremist actions”;                                           “extremist” government re-
                                         basic principles
 “Euromaidan-bandits”                                                    sponsible for “crimes against
                                         get violated
 (UkrN 20.01.2014b)                                                      humanity”
                                         (by the other)
                                                                         (UkrN 23.01.2014a)
 “Extremists are trying to rape
 all Ukraine, constitutional             adversaries as ene-
 order and legality.”                    mies of the people/             “keep fighting for freedom”
 (GovUkr 22.01.2014a)                    of Ukraine itself               to prevent “dictatorship”;
 determined “to fight anarchy,     →                              ←      “people have crossed the line
 chaos, and the danger of                Ukrainian state,                of peaceful protests”; “no way
 division caused by Maidan               nation and society              back” (MMIC 21.01.2014c)
 protests”                               at stake
 (GovUkr 22.01.2014a)
 “cynical and amoral terrorists                                          “government only under-
 preparing a coup d’etat”                                                stands a language of vio-
 (GovUkr 23.01.2014c)                                                    lence”
                                         point of no return              (UkrN 25.01.2014c)
                                         reached
 “seizure of state institutions    →                              ←      “fruitless protests” entailing
 by radicals”                                                            “radicalisation” of protesters
                                         danger of civil war
 (GovUkr 27.01.2014a)                                                    (UkrN 24.01.2014a)
                                                                         “Give me liberty or give me
                                                                         death!”139

(Own table)



    Based on the analysis of the text corpus, the observation of violence in phase IV is
embedded in communication that mainly centres around blaming, distancing, and de-
grading. Hence, discursive threads dealing with the delegitimisation of violence used by
the other side and, respectively, the legitimisation of the own side’s use of force draw on
the same communicative reservoir that has been opened up between the poles of contra-
diction in the conflict discourse before (see recapitulating overview in table 17).




139   This statement became one of the prominent rallying cries among Maidan protesters after the first
      deaths caused by live ammunition during battles with police forces (see e.g. KyivPost 24.01.2014).
200   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      Table 17: Dimenions of the conflict system I-IV

        Dimension        Phase       Poles of Contradiction
                                     continuing non-vio-                   extending protest means and
                                     lent protests (including              methods/enforcing democ-
                                     blockings, civil disobe-              racy & liberty with violent
                                     dience etc.)                          strategies
                         IV
                                     defending state                       ongoing transformation of
                                     sovereignty based on a                state sovereignty/the people’s
                                     monopoly on the use of                sovereignty and society as a
                                     force without limits                  whole
                                                                           civil society activities as
                                     civil society commit-
                                                                           part of a profound and self-
                                     ment with the objective
                                                                           determined societal transfor-
                                     to seize power
                                                                           mation
                         III         civil disobedience and
                                     blockings as subver-         versus   blocking of public institutions
                                     sion of state authority               and services as democratic
                                     and attack against                    instruments of protest
        factual                      sovereignty
                                     commitment to na-
                                                                           obligation to respect inter-
                                     tional law and order,
                                                                           national legal frameworks,
                                     national security, law
                                                                           especially human rights
                                     enforcement
                                     revolution as illegal act,            revolution as positive change
                         II          source of instability                 of system, social progress
                                     national political
                                     decision-making as                    political decision-making as
                                     consequence of changes                part of exclusively national
                                     in global balance of                  affairs
                                     power
                                     deepening relations                   explicitly orienting Ukraine
                                     with Russia                           towards Europe
                         I
                                     conforming to (binary)                national emancipation and
                                     geopolitical condition                independence
          Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014     201



 Dimension          Phase       Poles of Contradiction
                                invoking unity and                     invoking a common European
                                patriotism                             identity
                    IV          relapse into Soviet                    blundering into an uncertain
                                times: politically, eco-               western future: politically,
                                nomically, socially                    economically, socially
                                                                       overcoming the west-east-
                                “restauration” of full                 division of Ukraine; resist Rus-
                                partnership with Russia                sian domination in “Ukrainian
                    III                                                Arab Spring”
 temporal                       working towards pros-
                                                                       remembering the dark side of
                                perous future alongside
                                                                       the Russian past
                                Russia
                                Maidan protests as
                                                                       EuroMaidan as world-histori-
                    II          follow-up of historical
                                                                       cal mission of freedom
                                extremisms
                                Orange Revolution as
                                                            versus     EuroMaidan as necessary
                                historical failure and
                    I                                                  follow-up of Orange Revolu-
                                source of long-term
                                                                       tion
                                instability
                                the other: an enemy
                                                                       holding up values of under-
                                threatening the exis-
                    IV                                                 standing, rapprochement
                                tence of the self to be
                                                                       and cooperation
                                fought against
                                reinventing the political
                                                                       working with/ within the
                    III         in an “identity revolu-
                                                                       existing political structures
                                tion”
 social
                                allocation of political                allocation of political power
                                power as winner-takes-                 as parallel representation of
                    II          it-all scenario                        different ideas and interests
                                societal cleavages as                  society as integration of
                                source of danger                       continuing differences
                                                                       (newly developing) civil
                    I           post-Soviet elites
                                                                       society

(Own tabe)



    In the course of this, it becomes obvious how the discursive framework further de-
veloped and extended its range through the successive escalating moves. The following
paragraphs highlight selected aspects of phase IV’s very last part, which is shaped by a
quick succession of conflict experiences.
202   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      A degrading discourse

                                                         “God knows I never hated anyone, but now
                                                         I do and I do so hard.”140

      In this very last part of phase IV, statements confirming a maximal emotional distance
      and degrading attitudes towards the other are among the most common.141 Conflict
      identities, as they have been evolving in the preceding phases, now clearly include images
      of “the enemy” within which the characterisation of the other as an “alien” beyond the
      scope of one’s own norms gets possible.142 As mentioned earlier in this chapter, in this
      way, dissidents become per se qualified as enemies unable and unwilling to negotiate
      compromise and, therefore, as legitimate aims of the own violent actions. In this regard,
      for example, the representation of Yanucovych as “marauding criminal” and “bandit” is
      seconded only by his demonisation as “Hitler” and more or less implicit instructions:
      “Would it not have been better to shot Hitler like a mad dog without waiting to see
      1945?” (UkrN 11.02.2014a; see also MMIC 17.02.2014b). Vice versa, Maidan protesters
      are wholesale discredited as anti-democratic extremists whose only goal is to “gain
      the ruler’s chairs at the cost of people’s blood.” (GovUkr 18.02.2014b)143 To counter this
      threat, the government, on its part, confirms to do all that is necessary to gain control of
      the chaos in Kiev (see also UkrN 19.02.2014a).
          In contrast, the conflict identity of the self on both sides is downright presented as
      positive.144 In this context, it is particularly remarkable that statements, referring to dif-
      ferent levels of lawfulness, suggest a necessary differentiation between “formal legiti-
      macy”, for example based on consent and support of the population, which is presented
      to be similarly high on both sides, and “moral legitimacy”, which is assessed to be cer-
      tainly greater on the own side (see e.g. UkrN 11.02.2014b). Following this and with ref-
      erence to the rising death toll on Maidan, talionic statements expressing wishes “to take
      vengeance for the victims” become more and more common (see e.g. UkrN 13.02.2014):

      140 Statement by Inna Taran, 18-year-old protester, interviewed by KyivPost (24.01.2014: 14). Taran was
          among those beaten on November 30. After being assaulted she had to undergo surgery to remove
          parts of one of her kidneys, due to severe beating.
      141 At the same time, based on poll data, it can be stated that the stand-off situation and thus the ob-
          vious failure of the strategies has a demoralising effect both on protesters’ side and among police
          forces (see MMIC 21.01.2014d).
      142 See exemplarily UkrN 9.02.2014b (brackets added): “Those guys [i.e. security forces] are aliens.
          They are not ours.”
      143 As already expounded earlier (see chapter 5.2/phase III), demonising rhetoric also becomes ob-
          vious in government statements and media accounts that focus on the danger of an imminent
          “fascist revolt” prepared by the “Right Sector” within the protest movement (see e.g. KyivPost
          7.02.2014: 2).
      144 With regard to anti-government protesters, for example, a number of statements acknowledge
          the “complete absence of barbarism”, “vandalism” and “sacking”. Also, EuroMaidan protesters are
          presented as having a “sense of responsibility” and not having lost their “human face” despite all
          aggression from the other side (see e.g. UkrN 13.02.2014). Voices from the government, in turn,
          never tire highlighting that the authorities provide assistance during disorders caused by the other
          side and do everything possible to ensure the proper functioning of the country, which is, according
          to these accounts, not involved in the conflict for the most part (see e.g. GovUkr 19.02.2014a).
          Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014      203

      “May you see in your dreams every night those people who died because of you. […]
      Live in fear – the payback for all that you have done is coming.” (UHHRU 20.02.2014)

Other statements suggest that the spiral of hatred, vengeance and bloodlust gets increas-
ingly inclusive since any trust in the authorities “committing crimes against humanity”
and violating international law has been lost and, despite the high death toll, violent
change ultimately including the elimination of the enemy becomes more and more ac-
ceptable (see e.g. KyivPost 21.02.2014: 4–5).

A militarising discourse: “Fighting at the front lines”
Another aspect of phase IV’s final stage, here labelled as increasingly “militarising”,
pays attention to a marked discursive trait: Many statements concerning the incidences
on Maidan from different sources collectively convey the impression that the protests
directly compare with war-related events, e.g. by setting the tone of a “reporting from
the front lines”. The KyivPost (31.01.2014: 3), for example, publishes a “visual guide to
EuroMaidan” that offers an overview map of Kiev’s city centre with detailed depictions
of the protesters’ infrastructure, including “self-defence headquarters”, “medical aid
units”, and different rings of barricades. This kind of coverage gives the impression that
any report comes about under the spell of a quick succession of events and includes
sensational words and images underlining the idea of directly reporting from the firing
lines. This impression is even strengthened by drawing the attention to the “occupation”
of private and public buildings (e.g. Trade Union Building, Kyiv City State Administra-
tion etc.), which takes place under threat and use of violent means and is presented as
necessary (see chapter 5.2./ phase IV).
     Against the background of a conflict situation perceived as fateful, it can be stated
that there is a firm conviction on all sides that “the protests will not continue in a peace-
ful way” (UkrN 30.01.2014b; italics added). In this context, there is talk of “12.000 armed
combatants” being “deployed” on Maidan: On the one hand, these combatants consider
themselves as “peacemakers”, like the UN blue helmets, who just react to illegitimate as-
saults of the security forces. On the other hand, one can find many hotheads in the ranks
of the combatants who plan to “revenge the victims’ blood” (UkrN 13.02.2014; KyivPost
14.02.2014: 12). The idea of a final battle without compromise further develops: conflict
parties set mutual deadlines (e.g. concerning the release of prisoners or the unblocking
of buildings); plans of a nationwide expansion of self-defence units become known145 ; ru-
mours about an imminent declaration of martial law as well as government statements
proclaiming that security forces are sufficiently equipped to “liquidate” the criminal and
illegal protests on Maidan (GovUkr 18.02.2014a/b). Taken together, the situation is per-




145    On this, the formation of “all-female self-defense units” is particularly highlighted by KyivPost
       (14.02.2014: 13).
204   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      ceived as “tensed to the utmost” and “likely leading to a new and even more powerful
      explosion of public anger with unforeseeable consequences.” (UkrN 18.02.2014)146

      An all- encompassing discourse: Of investment climates, human rights
      and hegemons
      A brief retrospect: Escalating move A in phase I represents the starting point of an ever-
      growing conflict discourse. Here, political and economic communication of contradic-
      tions get translatable and understandable, or, in short, structurally coupled. In the fur-
      ther sequence of escalating moves in the following conflict phases, there are two variants
      of structural couplings: Either the formation of new structural couplings, for example
      when legal communication links up to the existing politico-economic conflict narrative
      (escalating move B); or, the transition of latently existing ones, for example when polit-
      ical communication gets widened by an explicit global dimension (escalating move C).
      In this course of this, the conflict discourse’s communicative reservoir steadily grows. At
      the end of the escalation process, as observed within the present study and the respective
      investigation period, conflict communication still feeds on this broad reservoir, which is
      made obvious in the following.
           Even in the latest phase of conflict escalation, which is characterised by the fast pace
      of violent events, there are parallel discursive threads in which the pros and cons of an
      economic opening to the east (CU/Russia) or to the west (AA/EU) are still pointedly con-
      trasted. On the one hand, statements on economic key figures and factors take up com-
      munication from a world economic framework (and thus from a facet of world society):
      currency stability, economic growth, investment climate, travelling without visa. On the
      other hand, economic decisions are observed under power political auspices, as for ex-
      ample attaching conditions to bail-out packages in favour of decisions on region-specific
      trade liberalisation or imposing economic sanctions show.147 In the same way, the con-
      tradiction between the principles of a functionally differentiated world economy (e.g. di-
      vision of labour) and a political system of world society gradually leaving behind a purely
      segmentary differentiation (e.g. attributing power strictly and solely to nations states
      which are by the way all alike in their organisation of government and opposition) par-
      ticularly shows up within the debate on the role of oligarchs. References from the con-
      flict discourse dealing with oligarchs do not only blur the lines between political and eco-
      nomic aspects but also reveal hierarchical descriptions of a social order that imply com-
      municative patterns of stratificatory differentiation in world society.148 As represented


      146 Against the background of a situation that “felt like real war” (AI 21.02.2014) and a spectacular
          descent into violence with 75 deaths in the following two days (February 19 and 20), only a day
          later the conflict situation is characterised as the result of a huge “miscalculation from both sides”
          (MMIC 20.02.2014b) that can lead into a “full-blown breakdown of society” (KyivPost 21.02.2014).
      147 On “Russian trade sanctions” and “market opening” see KyivPost (31.01.2014) and UkrN
          (7.02.2014a). Another example relates to currency stability, the role of savers and the National
          Bank (see KyivPost 7.02.2014, 14.02.2014: 4; GovUkr 12.02.2014a, 14.02.2014a, 19.02.2014a).
      148 As mentioned earlier, forms of stratificatory differentiation, e.g. becoming manifest in hierarchical
          social structures or hegemonic power orders, compete with forms of functional differentiation,
          e.g. in subsystems of politics, economy etc., and segmentary differentiation, e.g. in form of nation
          states as like-units (for details see chapter 3.1).
         Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014        205

in the conflict discourse, the “oligarchic system” is constituted by a certain class of people
concentrating economic power (i.e. a small group of Ukrainian business leaders chairing
international consortia) and influencing policy decisions (i.e. either by holding an office
themselves or acting as a string-puller on the sidelines149 ) in order to be successful under
the conditions of a increasingly liberalising world market (e.g. by pressing for a consoli-
dation of Ukraine’s credit status in the globalised financial system).150
     As it has been demonstrated, the expansion of the politico-economic discourse by the
legal dimension (escalating move B), too, has a lasting discursive impact. Apart from the
above-mentioned statements on degrading and militarising, in the last part of phase IV,
notably two clusters of statements step forward: First, those statements that again take
up the issue of human rights and their violation from both sides. Exemplarily, it is stated
that protecting “basic human justice and dignity” (KyivPost 7.02.2014: 3) and “transform-
ing Ukraine into a democratic nation that respects the rule of law and human rights”
(KyivPost 14.02.2014: 1) is not only necessary but can be implemented, in case of need,
by force. Otherwise, in case of a failure of the Maidan protests, a defeat of a “Europe of
human rights” is expected (UkrN 17.02.2014a). A second cluster of statements also refers
to a kind of worldwide communication, more precisely to geopolitical constellations of
power. This becomes evident when voices from civil society claim that Ukraine needs
to finally emancipate itself from “Russia, the traditional hegemon” (MMIC 17.02.2014);
when the government announces (just after having concluded the Russia-Ukraine-deal)
its plans to work towards a “constructive partnership of Ukraine with NATO” (GovUkr
12.02.2014g); and when Maidan protesters, with reference to the Holodomor in 1932/1933,
reject any politics of non-intervention from the EU or the USA and call for solidarity
“against the danger from the east” (UkrN 18.02.2014; see also 19.02.2014a).
     Finally, both of the above mentioned clusters of communication – the manifold ref-
erences to human rights as a facet of legal communication in world society as well as the
much-cited self-determination ideal vs. global power constellations recalling a changing
self-observation of power in political communication – may serve to once again high-
light a basic principle of this analysis: Since there are different modes of differentiation
at work, world society’s subsystems of communication provide reservoirs of contradic-
tions; developing conflict systems draw on these reservoirs as they span a communica-
tive field in which contradictions become articulated, understandable, processable and
connectable.




149 President Yanucovych himself is also labelled as an oligarch. However, the most cited are Rinat
    Akhmetov, Dmytro Firtash and Viktor Pinchuk mentioned earlier (see chapter 5.4/phase III; for the
    “changeover” of those three to the EuroMaidan side see also UkrN 10.02.2014).
150 To put in back in systems theoretical terms: These features attributed to the “oligarchic system” il-
    lustrate contradictions between a functionally differentiated world society, an idea of power imag-
    ined as nationally bound, and a hierarchical orientation of world economy and thus world society.
206   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      5.6 Summary

      The analytical narrative on the Maidan protests in Ukraine 2013/2014 presented here of-
      fers a reconstruction of a process of conflict escalation which builds on three dimensions
      of meaning in the discourse (factual, temporal, social) and identifies major moments of
      conflict development (escalating moves). The case study does not claim to offer an ab-
      solute timeline and a causal explanation of events on Maidan but gives an insight into
      the collective creation and experiencing of a conflict based on documented text-based
      communication that had been published within the period of investigation.
           Following the multi-step analysis introduced in the work plan (chapter 4.4), the pro-
      cess of conflict escalation was observed along four phases. The golden thread of the con-
      flict discourse is represented by a succession of six escalating moves (A-F). Recapitulat-
      ing the salient key words, the following table offers an overview on the results of the case
      study on the Maidan protests in terms of phases, escalating moves, the world societal
      background of communication and observations of violence appearing in the respective
      context.
           Now, recalling the basic research question of this study – How do conflicts esca-
      late? – this analytical narrative can be understood as a possible answer to the question
      of how the Maidan protests escalated. Based on the results of the present case study, it
      escalated as a succession of escalating moves identified while observing the discourse
      as representation of an evolving conflict system. As demonstrated, the analysed conflict
      system continuously irritates its environment, incorporates communication, and draws
      on a communicative reservoir that is filled with contradictions ensuing from competing
      modes of differentiation between and within world society’s subsystems. Thereby, new
      communication gets not only simply added to an existing spectre of the conflict dis-
      course but, by importing further contradictions, opens up avenues for new ramifications
      of the discourse. Each conflict phase shows specific observations of (il)legitimate vio-
      lence (see extreme right column in table above) which can be seen as embedded interim
      results of the discourse and, at the same time, as constitutive elements of its further
      progression.
           In an overall view, the present analytical narrative (including all tables, e.g. on poles
      of contradiction) consists of a multitude of analytical observations derived from the
      text corpus or, in other words, of iteratively gained hypotheses on the process of conflict
      escalation in the context of the Maidan protests from November 21 to February 22 in
      2013/2014. The following sections present a most condensed answer to the research
      question on the basis of this study; they are drastically reduced in case study details and
      represent the essence of the second-order observation perspective adopted here; and,
      they are to be understood as a kind of reading aid to go through the table above.
           The Maidan protests in Ukraine 2013/2014 escalate in a discursive environment where
      new forms of attributing political power, especially supranational integration within the
      context of the EU, encounter strong ideas of national emancipation and self-determina-
      tion. In phase I (Nov 21–30), the first and significant discursive effects of this are made
      explicit within a cluster of communication referred to as escalating move A: Therein, eco-
      nomic considerations about being integrated into a larger European market and thus
      about increasing revenue prospects as a stakeholder meet competing forms of (self-) ob-
Table 18: Overview escalating moves (Ukraine)

 turning point event     phase        escalating move                                                            ‘world societal communi-          key observations of (il)legiti-
                                                                                                                 cation’ spelled out in terms      mate violence
                                                                                                                 of…
                                                structural coupling               normative shift
 Nov 21:                 I            A         economic considerations           emergence of civil society     economic communication
 suspension of AA                               (market integration) connect      as an alternative political    referring to a (world) mar-
                                                to competing political power      force                          ket logic; communication
                                                claims (east vs. west; integra-                                  referring to changing (self-)
                                                tion vs. emancipation)                                           observations as to political
                                                                                                                 power
 Nov 30: ‘cleaning’ of   II           B         legal considerations on the       ambivalent meaning of          different frames of reference     legal use of force to enforce
 Maidan by force                                use of force get articulated      revolution accentuated:        in legal communication:           law vs. disproportionate use of
                                                and connected to politico-        systemic change as an          national state law vs. human      force
                                                economic communication            existential threat             rights                            surprising overreaction
                                      C         two ideas of political power      increasing simplification/     political communication os-       precedential case
                                                get outspoken: Ukraine as         focus on two adversarial po-   cillating between inviolability   blocking and occupation of
                                                architect of its fortune vs.      sitions: pro-government/       of sovereign nation states        buildings, civil disobedience
                                                Ukraine at the mercy of           Russia vs. pro-civil society   and attribution of political      threats and skirmishes
                                                global powers                     opposition/EU                  power within global spheres
                                                                                                                 of influence
                                                                                                                                                                                     Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014
                                                                                                                                                                                     207
                                                                                                                                                                          208




 turning point event     phase   escalating move                                                            ‘world societal communi-         key observations of
                                                                                                            cation’ spelled out in terms     (il)legitimate violence
                                                                                                            of…
                                          structural coupling                normative shift
 Dec 17:                 III     D        political communication in tra-    increasing elimination of      political communication          limits of the use of force
 Russia-Ukraine-deal                      ditional national roles models     diversity; dualist polarisa-   processing the attribution       as means of political
                                          (government vs. opposition)        tion of conflict identities    of political power besided       power
                                          complemented by civil society      at the expense of nuanced      traditional roles and entities   rhetorics creating an
                                          sector                             positions                                                       existential and war-like
                                                                                                                                             atmosphere
 Jan 16: adoption of     IV      E        new quality of connection          mass media communica-          seen in tightening connection    adversaries as enemies
 anti-protest-laws (to                    between medial and political       tion observed as political     to political communication       degrading, demonisa-
                                                                                                                                                                          Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society




 Feb 22: breakup of                       communication                      communication in conflict                                       tion of the other
 government)                     F        new overlap between legal and      entrenching conflict identi-   densification of communica-      rhetoric militarisation
                                          political commmunication as to     ties: determination to fight   tion: human rights violations,   violent incidences
                                          legitimacy of intensified use of   against ‘the enemy’ with all   right to (violent) resistance,   reached point of no
                                          force                              means at hand                  (violent) influence of global    return
                                                                                                            power constellations and/or      danger of civil war
                                                                                                            economic liberalisation          use of force as general
                                                                                                                                             means of choice

(Own table)
        Chapter 5. Observing a Developing Conflict System: The Maidan Protests in Ukraine 2013/2014   209

servation in political communication that observe legitimate political power in Ukraine
as caught between a binary geopolitical condition and the idea of national self-determi-
nation (see in detail chapter 5.5.1). As these observations get articulated, understandable
and thus able to be contradicted (i.e. structurally coupled), the conflict discourse begins
to span along the axes of overlapping political alternatives: east versus west and (supra-
national) integration versus (national) emancipation. In this phase of intensified debate
about how political power is attributed within new frames of reference, the rather tra-
ditional division between the Ukrainian government and opposition shifts in favour of
an alternative holder of political authority referred to as civil society. With this, the dis-
course carries out a normative shift that will be continued in phase III later on.
     Building on this, in phase II (Nov 30 – Dec 17), two clusters of communication could
be identified that pointedly show the further development of the conflict discourse: With
escalating move B, the politico-economic conflict tale unfolded in phase I now connects
(i.e. structurally couples) to legal considerations on the use of force; this is observed as be-
ing triggered by the “cleaning of Maidan by force” on Nov 30/Dec 1 which is characterised
as the first violent event since the begin of the protests and thus as a “precedential case” of
an “overreaction”. The analysis of communication does not only show alternative frames
of reference within legal communication (national state law vs. human rights); it does
also highlight (self-)observations pointing to the (il)legality of political forms of action
(street protests, civil disobedience etc.) and the reactions to them from security forces;
also, the occurrences presented are located within a historically charged and ambivalent
context of “revolution” between freedom/democracy and chaos/human losses (see details
in chapter 5.5.2). In addition, with reference to escalating move C, two ideas of how to un-
derstand Ukraine’s political capabilities get articulated, understandable and thus able to
be further on contradicted (i.e. structurally coupled): on the one hand, political decision-
making is presented as an autonomous national process based on sovereign domestic
preferences; on the other hand, national political decision-making is observed as being
restricted by a certain global balance of power or spheres of influence respectively. Within
this cluster of contradicting communication along the axes illustrated earlier relating to
escalating move A (east vs. west; integration vs. emancipation), the formation of mutu-
ally exclusive conflict identities (“Russophiles” vs. “Europhiles”) gets a further boost (nor-
mative shift). Observations referring to violence in phase II are particularly focused on
the (dis-) proportionate use of force either applied to maintain law and order or to protest
against a certain policy. In the course of this, positions articulated on this issue increas-
ingly see themselves as adversarial; violence against things and people, be it in terms of
protest means or reactions to the same, are more and more qualified as acceptable or
even necessary.
     In phase III (Dec 17-Jan 16), the conflict discourse can largely be characterised by
communication on what is to be considered as a legitimate political force that holds
power and authority and should be recognised in the political process. Hence, within the
context of escalating move D, (self-) observations including the idea of political power
holders reflecting the exclusive result of a ‘traditional’ allocation of power between gov-
ernment and opposition (within state institutions, especially the parliament) encounter
other ones that wish to open up the political process for a, in principle, broad range of so-
cietal actors able to communicate in an enduring and binding manner. At the same time,
210   Richard Bösch: Observing Conflict Escalation in World Society

      the articulation of these positions and the processing of their inherent contradiction in
      communication (i.e. structural coupling) is accompanied by an increasing elimination
      of diversity (see chapter 5.5.3). In this phase, the normative shift of the discourse does
      not only consist in a gradual disappearance of the broad diversity of objectives, ideas,
      interests, currents etc. of protests on Maidan under the label of “anti-government”;
      there are also observations referring to “alliance-building” that are perceived as a dualist
      polarisation: the declaration of Ukrainian political parties and Maidan protesters to
      work together; the new initiative of the Ukrainian and Russian government to closely
      cooperate within the context of the “Russia-Ukraine-deal”. Observations of violence
      in phase III essentially refer to the limits of the use of force as a legitimate means of
      political communication; they circle around experiences of individual victims of violence
      (e.g. Tetyana Chornovol, opposition activist and journalist) but also covers barricades,
      blockings, clashings and the use of force against security forces. The common under-
      lying issue is represented in the question of the extent to which those endowed with
      political power, be it an authority fearing the subversion of the state or civil society
      activists claiming their right to resistance, see themselves entitled to use force as an
      ultimate form of political communication. Thereby, presented as ultimate limits to the
      use of force, references to historical experiences (e.g. Holodomor) mix up with war-like
      rhetoric (e.g. “blood shed”, “war camps”) and martial future scenarios (e.g. “existential
      threat”, “fight for the very soul”).
           Finally, in phase IV (Jan 16-Feb 22), two escalating moves can be identified. First, re-
      ferred to as escalating move E, one cluster of communication deals with a new quality
      of connection between political and medial communication. More precisely, as pieces of
      mass media coverage get explicitly addressed as communication of power claims sup-
      porting either one side or the other and as they are, on their own terms, understood and
      articulated as such (e.g. as to “anti-protest laws” or “purposeful disinformation instru-
      mentalizing people”), political and medial communication reach a new level of structural
      coupling (for details see the first sections of chapter 5.5.4). While, in preceding conflict
      phases, mass media did not observe themselves and had not been observed as relevant
      addresses within the conflict system, now, media companies get observed as acting en-
      tities in conflict; this constitutes a further normative shift of the discourse. Beyond that,
      escalating move F refers to a second cluster of communication in phase IV in which the
      structural coupling of legal and political communication is brought to a different level.
      In this sense, the “anti-protest laws” represent the basic point of reference for legal com-
      munication on the legitimate use of force and organised violence in armed conflict (as
      e.g. concerning a state of emergency/threat to state order or concerning a certain right
      to resistance against dictatorship); this matches with political communication in which
      observations of an increasingly excessive use of force (by all sides) look at violence as a
      normalising means of political power claims. Against this background, the conflict dis-
      course carries out a last and crucial normative shift; based on sequences of blaming,
      distancing, degrading, demonisation and militarisation, it is about entrenching conflict
      identities (pro-vs. anti-government) that perceive each other as enemies determined to
      fight with all means at hand. Therefore, observations of (il)legitimate violence in this very
      last phase clearly show a generalisation of violence as standard means of communication
      (see details in last part of 5.5.4).
